THE ADVENTURES OF ULYSSES




CHAPTER ONE

The Cicons.--The Fruit of the Lotos-tree.--Polyphemus and the Cyclops.--
The Kingdom of the Winds, and God Aeolus's Fatal Present.--The
Laestrygonian Man-eaters.


This history tells of the wanderings of Ulysses and his followers in their
return from Troy, after the destruction of that famous city of Asia by the
Grecians. He was inflamed with a desire of seeing again, after a ten
years' absence, his wife and native country, Ithaca. He was king of a
barren spot, and a poor country in comparison of the fruitful plains of
Asia, which he was leaving, or the wealthy kingdoms which he touched upon
in his return; yet, wherever he came, he could never see a soil which
appeared in his eyes half so sweet or desirable as his country earth. This
made him refuse the offers of the goddess Calypso to stay with her, and
partake of her immortality in the delightful island; and this gave him
strength to break from the enchantments of Circe, the daughter of the Sun.

From Troy, ill winds cast Ulysses and his fleet upon the coast of the
Cicons, a people hostile to the Grecians. Landing his forces, he laid
siege to their chief city, Ismarus, which he took, and with it much spoil,
and slew many people. But success proved fatal to him; for his soldiers,
elated with the spoil, and the good store of provisions which they found
in that place, fell to eating and drinking, forgetful of their safety,
till the Cicons, who inhabited the coast, had time to assemble their
friends and allies from the interior; who, mustering in prodigious force,
set upon the Grecians, while they negligently revelled and feasted, and
slew many of them, and recovered the spoil. They, dispirited and thinned
in their numbers, with difficulty made their retreat good to the ships.

Thence they set sail, sad at heart, yet something cheered that with such
fearful odds against them they had not all been utterly destroyed. A
dreadful tempest ensued, which for two nights and two days tossed them
about, but the third day the weather cleared, and they had hopes of a
favourable gale to carry them to Ithaca; but, as they doubled the Cape of
Malea, suddenly a north wind arising drove them back as far as Cythera.
After that, for the space of nine days, contrary winds continued to drive
them in an opposite direction to the point to which they were bound, and
the tenth day they put in at a shore where a race of men dwell that are
sustained by the fruit of the lotos-tree. Here Ulysses sent some of his
men to land for fresh water, who were met by certain of the inhabitants,
that gave them some of their country food to eat--not with any ill
intention towards them, though in the event it proved pernicious; for,
having eaten of this fruit, so pleasant it proved to their appetite that
they in a minute quite forgot all thoughts of home, or of their
countrymen, or of ever returning back to the ships to give an account of
what sort of inhabitants dwelt there, but they would needs stay and live
there among them, and eat of that precious food forever; and when Ulysses
sent other of his men to look for them, and to bring them back by force,
they strove, and wept, and would not leave their food for heaven itself,
so much the pleasure of that enchanting fruit had bewitched them. But
Ulysses caused them to be bound hand and foot, and cast under the hatches;
and set sail with all possible speed from that baneful coast, lest others
after them might taste the lotos, which had such strange qualities to make
men forget their native country and the thoughts of home.

Coasting on all that night by unknown and out-of-the-way shores, they came
by daybreak to the land where the Cyclops dwell, a sort of giant shepherds
that neither sow nor plough, but the earth untilled produces for them rich
wheat and barley and grapes, yet they have neither bread nor wine, nor
know the arts of cultivation, nor care to know them; for they live each
man to himself, without law or government, or anything like a state or
kingdom; but their dwellings are in caves, on the steep heads of
mountains; every man's household governed by his own caprice, or not
governed at all; their wives and children as lawless as themselves, none
caring for others, but each doing as he or she thinks good. Ships or boats
they have none, nor artificers to make them, no trade or commerce, or wish
to visit other shores; yet they have convenient places for harbours and
for shipping. Here Ulysses with a chosen party of twelve followers landed,
to explore what sort of men dwelt there, whether hospitable and friendly
to strangers, or altogether wild and savage, for as yet no dwellers
appeared in sight.

The first sign of habitation which they came to was a giant's cave rudely
fashioned, but of a size which betokened the vast proportions of its
owner; the pillars which supported it being the bodies of huge oaks or
pines, in the natural state of the tree, and all about showed more marks
of strength than skill in whoever built it. Ulysses, entering it, admired
the savage contrivances and artless structure of the place, and longed to
see the tenant of so outlandish a mansion; but well conjecturing that
gifts would have more avail in extracting courtesy than strength would
succeed in forcing it, from such a one as he expected to find the
inhabitant, he resolved to flatter his hospitality with a present of Greek
wine, of which he had store in twelve great vessels, so strong that no one
ever drank it without an infusion of twenty parts of water to one of wine,
yet the fragrance of it even then so delicious that it would have vexed a
man who smelled it to abstain from tasting it; but whoever tasted it, it
was able to raise his courage to the height of heroic deeds. Taking with
them a goat-skin flagon full of this precious liquor, they ventured into
the recesses of the cave. Here they pleased themselves a whole day with
beholding the giant's kitchen, where the flesh of sheep and goats lay
strewed; his dairy, where goat-milk stood ranged in troughs and pails; his
pens, where he kept his live animals; but those he had driven forth to
pasture with him when he went out in the morning. While they were feasting
their eyes with a sight of these curiosities, their ears were suddenly
deafened with a noise like the falling of a house. It was the owner of the
cave, who had been abroad all day feeding his flock, as his custom was, in
the mountains, and now drove them home in the evening from pasture. He
threw down a pile of fire-wood, which he had been gathering against
supper-time, before the mouth of the cave, which occasioned the crash they
heard. The Grecians hid themselves in the remote parts of the cave at
sight of the uncouth monster. It was Polyphemus, the largest and savagest
of the Cyclops, who boasted himself to be the son of Neptune. He looked
more like a mountain crag than a man, and to his brutal body he had a
brutish mind answerable. He drove his flock, all that gave milk, to the
interior of the cave, but left the rams and the he-goats without. Then
taking up a stone so massy that twenty oxen could not have drawn it, he
placed it at the mouth of the cave, to defend the entrance, and sat him
down to milk his ewes and his goats; which done, he lastly kindled a fire,
and throwing his great eye round the cave (for the Cyclops have no more
than one eye, and that placed in the midst of their forehead), by the
glimmering light he discerned some of Ulysses's men.

"Ho! guests, what are you? Merchants or wandering thieves?" he bellowed
out in a voice which took from them all power of reply, it was so
astounding.

Only Ulysses summoned resolution to answer, that they came neither for
plunder nor traffic, but were Grecians who had lost their way, returning
from Troy; which famous city, under the conduct of Agamemnon, the renowned
son of Atreus, they had sacked, and laid level with the ground. Yet now
they prostrated themselves humbly before his feet, whom they acknowledged
to be mightier than they, and besought him that he would bestow the rites
of hospitality upon them, for that Jove was the avenger of wrongs done to
strangers, and would fiercely resent any injury which they might suffer.

"Fool!" said the Cyclop, "to come so far to preach to me the fear of the
gods. We Cyclops care not for your Jove, whom you fable to be nursed by a
goat, nor any of your blessed ones. We are stronger than they, and dare
bid open battle to Jove himself, though you and all your fellows of the
earth join with him." And he bade them tell him where their ship was in
which they came, and whether they had any companions. But Ulysses, with a
wise caution, made answer that they had no ship or companions, but were
unfortunate men, whom the sea, splitting their ship in pieces, had dashed
upon his coast, and they alone had escaped. He replied nothing, but
gripping two of the nearest of them, as if they had been no more than
children, he dashed their brains out against the earth, and, shocking to
relate, tore in pieces their limbs, and devoured them yet warm and
trembling, making a lion's meal of them, lapping the blood; for the
Cyclops are _man-eaters_, and esteem human flesh to be a delicacy far
above goat's or kid's; though by reason of their abhorred customs few men
approach their coast, except some stragglers, or now and then a
shipwrecked mariner. At a sight so horrid, Ulysses and his men were like
distracted people. He, when he had made an end of his wicked supper,
drained a draught of goat's milk down his prodigious throat, and lay down
and slept among his goats. Then Ulysses drew his sword, and half resolved
to thrust it with all his might in at the bosom of the sleeping monster;
but wiser thoughts restrained him, else they had there without help all
perished, for none but Polyphemus himself could have removed that mass of
stone which he had placed to guard the entrance. So they were constrained
to abide all that night in fear.

When day came the Cyclop awoke, and kindling a fire, made his breakfast of
two other of his unfortunate prisoners, then milked his goats as he was
accustomed, and pushing aside the vast stone, and shutting it again when
he had done upon the prisoners, with as much ease as a man opens and shuts
a quiver's lid, he let out his flock, and drove them before him with
whistlings (as sharp as winds in storms) to the mountains.

Then Ulysses, of whose strength or cunning the Cyclop seems to have had as
little heed as of an infant's, being left alone, with the remnant of his
men which the Cyclop had not devoured, gave manifest proof how far manly
wisdom excels brutish force. He chose a stake from among the wood which
the Cyclop had piled up for firing, in length and thickness like a mast,
which he sharpened and hardened in the fire, and selected four men, and
instructed them what they should do with this stake, and made them perfect
in their parts.

When the evening was come, the Cyclop drove home his sheep; and as fortune
directed it, either of purpose, or that his memory was overruled by the
gods to his hurt (as in the issue it proved), he drove the males of his
flock, contrary to his custom, along with the dams into the pens. Then
shutting-to the stone of the cave, he fell to his horrible supper. When he
had despatched two more of the Grecians, Ulysses waxed bold with the
contemplation of his project, and took a bowl of Greek wine, and merrily
dared the Cyclop to drink.

[Illustration: _'Cyclop,' he said, 'take a bowl of wine from the hand of
your guest.'_]

"Cyclop," he said, "take a bowl of wine from the hand of your guest: it
may serve to digest the man's flesh that you have eaten, and show what
drink our ship held before it went down. All I ask in recompense, if you
find it good, is to be dismissed in a whole skin. Truly you must look to
have few visitors, if you observe this new custom of eating your guests."

The brute took and drank, and vehemently enjoyed the taste of wine, which
was new to him, and swilled again at the flagon, and entreated for more,
and prayed Ulysses to tell him his name, that he might bestow a gift upon
the man who had given him such brave liquor. The Cyclops, he said, had
grapes, but this rich juice, he swore, was simply divine. Again Ulysses
plied him with the wine, and the fool drank it as fast as he poured out,
and again he asked the name of his benefactor, which Ulysses, cunningly
dissembling, said, "My name is Noman: my kindred and friends in my own
country call me Noman."

"Then," said the Cyclop, "this is the kindness I will show thee, Noman: I
will eat thee last of all thy friends." He had scarce expressed his savage
kindness, when the fumes of the strong wine overcame him, and he reeled
down upon the floor and sank into a dead sleep.

Ulysses watched his time, while the monster lay insensible, and,
heartening up his men, they placed the sharp end of the stake in the fire
till it was heated red-hot, and some god gave them a courage beyond that
which they were used to have, and the four men with difficulty bored the
sharp end of the huge stake, which they had heated red-hot, right into the
eye of the drunken cannibal, and Ulysses helped to thrust it in with all
his might, still farther and farther, with effort, as men bore with an
auger, till the scalded blood gushed out, and the eye-ball smoked, and the
strings of the eye cracked, as the burning rafter broke in it, and the eye
hissed, as hot iron hisses when it is plunged into water.

He, waking, roared with the pain so loud that all the cavern broke into
claps like thunder. They fled, and dispersed into corners. He plucked the
burning stake from his eye, and hurled the wood madly about the cave. Then
he cried out with a mighty voice for his brethren the Cyclops, that dwelt
hard by in caverns upon hills; they, hearing the terrible shout, came
flocking from all parts to inquire, What ailed Polyphemus? and what cause
he had for making such horrid clamours in the night-time to break their
sleeps? if his fright proceeded from any mortal? if strength or craft had
given him his death's blow? He made answer from within that Noman had hurt
him, Noman had killed him, Noman was with him in the cave. They replied,
"If no man has hurt thee, and no man is with thee, then thou art alone,
and the evil that afflicts thee is from the hand of Heaven, which none can
resist or help." So they left him and went their way, thinking that some
disease troubled him. He, blind and ready to split with the anguish of the
pain, went groaning up and down in the dark, to find the doorway, which
when he found, he removed the stone, and sat in the threshold, feeling if
he could lay hold on any man going out with the sheep, which (the day now
breaking) were beginning to issue forth to their accustomed pastures. But
Ulysses, whose first artifice in giving himself that ambiguous name had
succeeded so well with the Cyclop, was not of a wit so gross to be caught
by that palpable device. But casting about in his mind all the ways which
he could contrive for escape (no less than all their lives depending on
the success), at last he thought of this expedient. He made knots of the
osier twigs upon which the Cyclop commonly slept; with which he tied the
fattest and fleeciest of the rams together, three in a rank, and under the
belly of the middle ram he tied a man, and himself last, wrapping himself
fast with both his hands in the rich wool of one, the fairest of the
flock.

And now the sheep began to issue forth very fast; the males went first,
the females, unmilked, stood by, bleating and requiring the hand of their
shepherd in vain to milk them, their full bags sore with being unemptied,
but he much sorer with the loss of sight. Still, as the males passed, he
felt the backs of those fleecy fools, never dreaming that they carried his
enemies under their bellies; so they passed on till the last ram came
loaded with his wool and Ulysses together. He stopped that ram and felt
him, and had his hand once in the hair of Ulysses, yet knew it not, and he
chid the ram for being last, and spoke to it as if it understood him, and
asked it whether it did not wish that its master had his eye again, which
that abominable Noman with his execrable rout had put out, when they had
got him down with wine; and he willed the ram to tell him whereabouts in
the cave his enemy lurked, that he might dash his brains and strew them
about, to ease his heart of that tormenting revenge which rankled in it.
After a deal of such foolish talk to the beast, he let it go.

When Ulysses found himself free, he let go his hold, and assisted in
disengaging his friends. The rams which had befriended them they carried
off with them to the ships, where their companions with tears in their
eyes received them, as men escaped from death. They plied their oars, and
set their sails, and when they were got as far off from shore as a voice
could reach, Ulysses cried out to the Cyclop: "Cyclop, thou shouldst not
have so much abused thy monstrous strength, as to devour thy guests. Jove
by my hand sends thee requital to pay thy savage inhumanity." The Cyclop
heard, and came forth enraged, and in his anger he plucked a fragment of a
rock, and threw it with blind fury at the ships. It narrowly escaped
lighting upon the bark in which Ulysses sat, but with the fall it raised
so fierce an ebb as bore back the ship till it almost touched the shore.
"Cyclop," said Ulysses, "if any ask thee who imposed on thee that
unsightly blemish in thine eye, say it was Ulysses, son of Laertes: the
king of Ithaca am I called, the waster of cities." Then they crowded sail,
and beat the old sea, and forth they went with a forward gale; sad for
fore-past losses, yet glad to have escaped at any rate; till they came to
the isle where Aeolus reigned, who is god of the winds.

Here Ulysses and his men were courteously received by the monarch, who
showed him his twelve children which have rule over the twelve winds. A
month they stayed and feasted with him, and at the end of the month he
dismissed them with many presents, and gave to Ulysses at parting an ox's
hide, in which were enclosed _all the winds_: only he left abroad the
western wind, to play upon their sails and waft them gently home to
Ithaca. This bag, bound in a glittering silver band so close that no
breath could escape, Ulysses hung up at the mast. His companions did not
know its contents, but guessed that the monarch had given to him some
treasures of gold or silver.

Nine days they sailed smoothly, favoured by the western wind, and by the
tenth they approached so nigh as to discern lights kindled on the shores
of their country earth: when, by ill-fortune, Ulysses, overcome with
fatigue of watching the helm, fell asleep. The mariners seized the
opportunity, and one of them said to the rest, "A fine time has this
leader of ours; wherever he goes he is sure of presents, when we come away
empty-handed; and see what King Aeolus has given him, store no doubt of
gold and silver." A word was enough to those covetous wretches, who quick
as thought untied the bag, and, instead of gold, out rushed with mighty
noise _all the winds_.

[Illustration: _Out rushed with mighty noise all the winds_.]

Ulysses with the noise awoke, and saw their mistake, but too late, for the
ship was driving with all the winds back far from Ithaca, far as to the
island of Aeolus from which they had parted, in one hour measuring back
what in nine days they had scarcely tracked, and in sight of home too! Up
he flew amazed, and, raving, doubted whether he should not fling himself
into the sea for grief of his bitter disappointment. At last he hid
himself under the hatches for shame. And scarce could he be prevailed
upon, when he was told he was arrived again in the harbour of King Aeolus,
to go himself or send to that monarch for a second succour; so much the
disgrace of having misused his royal bounty (though it was the crime of
his followers, and not his own) weighed upon him; and when at last he
went, and took a herald with him, and came where the god sat on his
throne, feasting with his children, he would not thrust in among them at
their meat, but set himself down like one unworthy in the threshold.

Indignation seized Aeolus to behold him in that manner returned; and he
said, "Ulysses, what has brought you back? Are you so soon tired of your
country; or did not our present please you? We thought we had given you a
kingly passport."  Ulysses made answer: "My men have done this ill
mischief to me; they did it while I slept." "Wretch!" said Aeolus,
"avaunt, and quit our shores: it fits not us to convoy men whom the gods
hate, and will have perish."

Forth they sailed, but with far different hopes than when they left the
same harbour the first time with all the winds confined, only the west
wind suffered to play upon their sails to waft them in gentle murmurs to
Ithaca. They were now the sport of every gale that blew, and despaired of
ever seeing home more. Now those covetous mariners were cured of their
surfeit for gold, and would not have touched it if it had lain in untold
heaps before them.

Six days and nights they drove along, and on the seventh day they put into
Lamos, a port of the Laestrygonians. So spacious this harbour was that it
held with ease all their fleet, which rode at anchor, safe from any
storms, all but the ship in which Ulysses was embarked. He, as if
prophetic of the mischance which followed, kept still without the harbour,
making fast his bark to a rock at the land's point, which he climbed with
purpose to survey the country. He saw a city with smoke ascending from the
roofs, but neither ploughs going, nor oxen yoked, nor any sign of
agricultural works. Making choice of two men, he sent them to the city to
explore what sort of inhabitants dwelt there. His messengers had not gone
far before they met a damsel, of stature surpassing human, who was coming
to draw water from a spring. They asked her who dwelt in that land. She
made no reply, but led them in silence to her father's palace. He was a
monarch, and named Antiphas. He and all his people were giants. When they
entered the palace, a woman, the mother of the damsel, but far taller than
she, rushed abroad and called for Antiphas. He came, and snatching up one
of the two men, made as if he would devour him. The other fled. Antiphas
raised a mighty shout, and instantly, this way and that, multitudes of
gigantic people issued out at the gates, and, making for the harbour, tore
up huge pieces of the rocks and flung them at the ships which lay there,
all which they utterly overwhelmed and sank; and the unfortunate bodies of
men which floated, and which the sea did not devour, these cannibals
thrust through with harpoons, like fishes, and bore them off to their dire
feast. Ulysses with his single bark, that had never entered the harbour,
escaped; that bark which was now the only vessel left of all the gallant
navy that had set sail with him from Troy. He pushed off from the shore,
cheering the sad remnant of his men, whom horror at the sight of their
countrymen's fate had almost turned to marble.




CHAPTER TWO

The House of Circe.--Men changed into Beasts.--The Voyage to Hell.--The
Banquet of the Dead.


On went the single ship till it came to the island of Aeaea, where Circe,
the dreadful daughter of the Sun, dwelt. She was deeply skilled in magic,
a haughty beauty, and had hair like the Sun. The Sun was her parent, and
begot her and her brother Aeaetes (such another as herself) upon Perse,
daughter to Oceanus.

Here a dispute arose among Ulysses's men, which of them should go ashore
and explore the country; for there was a necessity that some should go to
procure water and provisions, their stock of both being nigh spent; but
their hearts failed them when they called to mind the shocking fate of
their fellows whom the Laestrygonians had eaten, and those which the foul
Cyclop Polyphemus had crushed between his jaws; which moved them so
tenderly in the recollection that they wept. But tears never yet supplied
any man's wants; this Ulysses knew full well, and dividing his men (all
that were left) into two companies, at the head of one of which was
himself, and at the head of the other Eurylochus, a man of tried courage,
he cast lots which of them should go up into the country, and the lot fell
upon Eurylochus and his company, two-and-twenty in number, who took their
leave, with tears, of Ulysses and his men that stayed, whose eyes wore the
same wet badges of weak humanity, for they surely thought never to see
these their companions again, but that on every coast where they should
come they should find nothing but savages and cannibals.

Eurylochus and his party proceeded up the country, till in a dale they
descried the house of Circe, built of bright stone, by the roadside.
Before her gate lay many beasts, as wolves, lions, leopards, which, by her
art, of wild, she had rendered tame. These arose when they saw strangers,
and ramped upon their hinder paws, and fawned upon Eurylochus and his men,
who dreaded the effects of such monstrous kindness; and staying at the
gate they heard the enchantress within, sitting at her loom, singing such
strains as suspended all mortal faculties, while she wove a web, subtile
and glorious, and of texture inimitable on earth, as all the housewiferies
of the deities are. Strains so ravishingly sweet provoked even the sagest
and prudentest heads among the party to knock and call at the gate. The
shining gate the enchantress opened, and bade them come in and feast. They
unwise followed, all but Eurylochus, who stayed without the gate,
suspicious that some train was laid for them. Being entered, she placed
them in chairs of state, and set before them meal and honey, and Smyrna
wine, but mixed with baneful drugs of powerful enchantment. When they had
eaten of these, and drunk of her cup, she touched them with her
charming-rod, and straight they were transformed into swine, having the
bodies of swine, the bristles, and snout, and grunting noise of that
animal; only they still retained the minds of men, which made them the
more to lament their brutish transformation. Having changed them, she
shut them up in her sty with many more whom her wicked sorceries had
formerly changed, and gave them swine's food--mast, and acorns, and
chestnuts--to eat.

[Illustration: _And straight they were transformed into swine_.]

Eurylochus, who beheld nothing of these sad changes from where he was
stationed without the gate, only instead of his companions that entered
(who he thought had all vanished by witchcraft) beheld a herd of swine,
hurried back to the ship, to give an account of what he had seen; but so
frighted and perplexed, that he could give no distinct report of anything,
only he remembered a palace, and a woman singing at her work, and gates
guarded by lions. But his companions, he said, were all vanished.

Then Ulysses, suspecting some foul witchcraft, snatched his sword and his
bow, and commanded Eurylochus instantly to lead him to the place. But
Eurylochus fell down, and, embracing his knees, besought him by the name
of a man whom the gods had in their protection, not to expose his safety,
and the safety of them all, to certain destruction.

"Do thou then stay, Eurylochus," answered Ulysses: "eat thou and drink in
the ship in safety; while I go alone upon this adventure: necessity, from
whose law is no appeal, compels me."

So saying, he quitted the ship and went on shore, accompanied by none;
none had the hardihood to offer to partake that perilous adventure with
him, so much they dreaded the enchantments of the witch. Singly he pursued
his journey till he came to the shining gates which stood before her
mansion; but when he essayed to put his foot over her threshold, he was
suddenly stopped by the apparition of a young man, bearing a golden rod in
his hand, who was the god Mercury. He held Ulysses by the wrist, to stay
his entrance; and "Whither wouldest thou go?" he said, "O thou most erring
of the sons of men! knowest thou not that this is the house of great
Circe, where she keeps thy friends in a loathsome sty, changed from the
fair forms of men into the detestable and ugly shapes of swine? art thou
prepared to share their fate, from which nothing can ransom thee?" But
neither his words nor his coming from heaven could stop the daring foot of
Ulysses, whom compassion for the misfortune of his friends had rendered
careless of danger: which when the god perceived, he had pity to see
valour so misplaced, and gave him the flower of the herb _moly_, which is
sovereign against enchantments. The moly is a small unsightly root, its
virtues but little known and in low estimation; the dull shepherd treads
on it every day with his clouted shoes; but it bears a small white flower,
which is medicinal against charms, blights, mildews, and damps. "Take this
in thy hand," said Mercury, "and with it boldly enter her gates; when she
shall strike thee with her rod, thinking to change thee, as she has
changed thy friends, boldly rush in upon her with thy sword, and extort
from her the dreadful oath of the gods, that she will use no enchantments
against thee; then force her to restore thy abused companions." He gave
Ulysses the little white flower, and, instructing him how to use it,
vanished.

When the god was departed, Ulysses with loud knockings beat at the gate of
the palace. The shining gates were opened, as before, and great Circe with
hospitable cheer invited in her guest. She placed him on a throne with
more distinction than she had used to his fellows; she mingled wine in a
costly bowl, and he drank of it, mixed with those poisonous drugs. When he
had drunk, she struck him with her charming-rod, and "To your sty!" she
cried; "out, swine! mingle with your companions!" But those powerful words
were not proof against the preservative which Mercury had given to
Ulysses; he remained unchanged, and, as the god had directed him, boldly
charged the witch with his sword, as if he meant to take her life; which
when she saw, and perceived that her charms were weak against the antidote
which Ulysses bore about him, she cried out and bent her knees beneath his
sword, embracing his, and said, "Who or what manner of man art thou? Never
drank any man before thee of this cup but he repented it in some brute's
form. Thy shape remains unaltered as thy mind. Thou canst be none other
than Ulysses, renowned above all the world for wisdom, whom the Fates have
long since decreed that I must love. This haughty bosom bends to thee. O
Ithacan, a goddess wooes thee to her bed."

[Illustration: '_Who or what manner of man art thou?_']

"O Circe," he replied, "how canst thou treat of love or marriage with one
whose friends thou hast turned into beasts? and now offerest him thy hand
in wedlock, only that thou mightest have him in thy power, to live the
life of a beast with thee, naked, effeminate, subject to thy will, perhaps
to be advanced in time to the honour of a place in thy sty. What pleasure
canst thou promise which may tempt the soul of a reasonable man? Thy
meats, spiced with poison; or thy wines, drugged with death? Thou must
swear to me that thou wilt never attempt against me the treasons which
thou hast practised upon my friends." The enchantress, won by the terror
of his threats, or by the violence of that new love which she felt
kindling in her veins for him, swore by Styx, the great oath of the gods,
that she meditated no injury to him. Then Ulysses made show of gentler
treatment, which gave her hopes of inspiring him with a passion equal to
that which she felt. She called her handmaids, four that served her in
chief, who were daughters to her silver fountains, to her sacred rivers,
and to her consecrated woods, to deck her apartments, to spread rich
carpets, and set out her silver tables with dishes of the purest gold, and
meat as precious as that which the gods eat, to entertain her guest. One
brought water to wash his feet, and one brought wine to chase away, with a
refreshing sweetness, the sorrows that had come of late so thick upon him,
and hurt his noble mind. They strewed perfumes on his head, and, after he
had bathed in a bath of the choicest aromatics, they brought him rich and
costly apparel to put on. Then he was conducted to a throne of massy
silver, and a regale, fit for Jove when he banquets, was placed before
him. But the feast which Ulysses desired was to see his friends (the
partners of his voyage) once more in the shapes of men; and the food which
could give him nourishment must be taken in at his eyes. Because he missed
this sight, he sat melancholy and thoughtful, and would taste of none of
the rich delicacies placed before him. Which when Circe noted, she easily
divined the cause of his sadness, and leaving the seat in which she sat
throned, went to her sty, and let abroad his men, who came in like swine,
and filled the ample hall, where Ulysses sat, with gruntings. Hardly had
he time to let his sad eye run over their altered forms and brutal
metamorphosis, when, with an ointment which she smeared over them,
suddenly their bristles fell off, and they started up in their own shapes,
men as before. They knew their leader again, and clung about him, with joy
of their late restoration, and some shame for their late change; and wept
so loud, blubbering out their joy in broken accents, that the palace was
filled with a sound of pleasing mourning, and the witch herself, great
Circe, was not unmoved at the sight. To make her atonement complete, she
sent for the remnant of Ulysses's men who stayed behind at the ship,
giving up their great commander for lost; who when they came, and saw him
again alive, circled with their fellows, no expression can tell what joy
they felt; they even cried out with rapture, and to have seen their
frantic expressions of mirth a man might have supposed that they were just
in sight of their country earth, the cliffs of rocky Ithaca. Only
Eurylochus would hardly be persuaded to enter that palace of wonders, for
he remembered with a kind of horror how his companions had vanished from
his sight.

Then great Circe spake, and gave order that there should be no more
sadness among them, nor remembering of past sufferings. For as yet they
fared like men that are exiles from their country, and if a gleam of mirth
shot among them, it was suddenly quenched with the thought of their
helpless and homeless condition. Her kind persuasions wrought upon Ulysses
and the rest, and they spent twelve months in all manner of delight with
her in her palace. For Circe was a powerful magician, and could command
the moon from her sphere, or unroot the solid oak from its place to make
it dance for their diversion, and by the help of her illusions she could
vary the taste of pleasures, and contrive delights, recreations, and jolly
pastimes, to "fetch the day about from sun to sun, and rock the tedious
year as in a delightful dream."

At length Ulysses awoke from the trance of the faculties into which her
charms had thrown him, and the thought of home returned with tenfold
vigour to goad and sting him; that home where he had left his virtuous
wife Penelope, and his young son Telemachus. One day when Circe had been
lavish of her caresses, and was in her kindest humour, he moved her
subtly, and as it were afar off, the question of his home-return; to which
she answered firmly, "O Ulysses, it is not in my power to detain one whom
the gods have destined to further trials. But leaving me, before you
pursue your journey home, you must visit the house of Ades, or Death, to
consult the shade of Tiresias the Theban prophet; to whom alone, of all
the dead, Proserpine, queen of hell, has committed the secret of future
events: it is he that must inform you whether you shall ever see again
your wife and country." "O Circe," he cried, "that is impossible: who
shall steer my course to Pluto's kingdom? Never ship had strength to make
that voyage." "Seek no guide," she replied; "but raise you your mast, and
hoist your white sails, and sit in your ship in peace: the north wind
shall waft you through the seas, till you shall cross the expanse of the
ocean and come to where grow the poplar groves and willows pale of
Proserpine: where Pyriphlegethon and Cocytus and Acheron mingle their
waves. Cocytus is an arm of Styx, the forgetful river. Here dig a pit, and
make it a cubit broad and a cubit long, and pour in milk, and honey, and
wine, and the blood of a ram, and the blood of a black ewe, and turn away
thy face while thou pourest in, and the dead shall come flocking to taste
the milk and the blood; but suffer none to approach thy offering till thou
hast inquired of Tiresias all which thou wishest to know."

He did as great Circe had appointed. He raised his mast, and hoisted his
white sails, and sat in his ship in peace. The north wind wafted him
through the seas, till he crossed the ocean, and came to the sacred woods
of Proserpine. He stood at the confluence of the three floods, and digged
a pit, as she had given directions, and poured in his offering--the blood
of a ram, and the blood of a black ewe, milk, and honey, and wine; and the
dead came to his banquet; aged men, and women, and youths, and children
who died in infancy. But none of them would he suffer to approach, and dip
their thin lips in the offering, till Tiresias was served, not though his
own mother was among the number, whom now for the first time he knew to be
dead, for he had left her living when he went to Troy, and she had died
since his departure, and the tidings never reached him; though it irked
his soul to use constraint upon her, yet in compliance with the injunction
of great Circe he forced her to retire along with the other ghosts. Then
Tiresias, who bore a golden sceptre, came and lapped of the offering, and
immediately he knew Ulysses, and began to prophesy: _he denounced woe to
Ulysses--woe, woe, and many sufferings--through the anger of Neptune for
the putting out of the eye of the sea-god's son. Yet there was safety
after suffering, if they could abstain from slaughtering the oxen of the
Sun after they landed in the Triangular island. For Ulysses, the gods had
destined him from a king to become a beggar, and to perish by his own
guests, unless he slew those who knew him not_.

[Illustration: _And the dead came to his banquet_.]

This prophecy, ambiguously delivered, was all that Tiresias was empowered
to unfold, or else there was no longer place for him; for now the souls of
the other dead came flocking in such numbers, tumultuously demanding the
blood, that freezing horror seized the limbs of the living Ulysses, to see
so many, and all dead, and he the only one alive in that region. Now his
mother came and lapped the blood, without restraint from her son, and now
she knew him to be her son, and inquired of him why he had come alive to
their comfortless habitations. And she said that affliction for Ulysses's
long absence had preyed upon her spirits, and brought her to the grave.

Ulysses's soul melted at her moving narration, and forgetting the state of
the dead, and that the airy texture of disembodied spirits does not admit
of the embraces of flesh and blood, he threw his arms about her to clasp
her: the poor ghost melted from his embrace, and, looking mournfully upon
him, vanished away.

Then saw he other females: Tyro, who when she lived was the paramour of
Neptune, and by him had Pelias and Neleus. Antiope, who bore two like sons
to Jove, Amphion and Zethus, founders of Thebes. Alcmena, the mother of
Hercules, with her fair daughter, afterwards her daughter-in-law, Megara.
There also Ulysses saw Jocasta, the unfortunate mother and wife of
Oedipus; who, ignorant of kin, wedded with her son, and when she had
discovered the unnatural alliance, for shame and grief hanged herself. He
continued to drag a wretched life above the earth, haunted by the dreadful
Furies. There was Leda, the wife of Tyndarus, the mother of the beautiful
Helen, and of the two brave brothers Castor and Pollux, who obtained this
grace from Jove, that, being dead, they should enjoy life alternately,
living in pleasant places under the earth. For Pollux had prayed that his
brother Castor, who was subject to death, as the son of Tyndarus, should
partake of his own immortality, which he derived from an immortal sire.
This the Fates denied; therefore Pollux was permitted to divide his
immortality with his brother Castor, dying and living alternately.
There was Iphimedia, who bore two sons to Neptune that were giants, Otus
and Ephialtes: Earth in her prodigality never nourished bodies to such
portentous size and beauty as these two children were of, except Orion. At
nine years old they had imaginations of climbing to heaven to see what the
gods were doing; they thought to make stairs of mountains, and were for
piling Ossa upon Olympus, and setting Pelion upon that, and had perhaps
performed it, if they had lived till they were striplings; but they were
cut off by death in the infancy of their ambitious project. Phaedra was
there, and Procris, and Ariadne, mournful for Theseus's desertion, and
Maera, and Clymene, and Eryphile, who preferred gold before wedlock faith.

But now came a mournful ghost, that late was Agamemnon, son of Atreus, the
mighty leader of all the host of Greece and their confederate kings that
warred against Troy. He came with the rest to sip a little of the blood at
that uncomfortable banquet. Ulysses was moved with compassion to see him
among them, and asked him what untimely fate had brought him there, if
storms had overwhelmed him coming from Troy, or if he had perished in some
mutiny by his own soldiers at a division of the prey.

"By none of these," he replied, "did I come to my death; but slain at a
banquet to which I was invited by Aegisthus after my return home. He
conspiring with my adulterous wife, they laid a scheme for my destruction,
training me forth to a banquet as an ox goes to the slaughter, and, there
surrounding me, they slew me with all my friends about me.

"Clytemnestra, my wicked wife, forgetting the vows which she swore to me
in wedlock, would not lend a hand to close my eyes in death. But nothing
is so heaped with impieties as such a woman, who would kill her spouse
that married her a maid. When I brought her home to my house a bride, I
hoped in my heart that she would be loving to me and to my children. Now,
her black treacheries have cast a foul aspersion on her whole sex. Blessed
husbands will have their loving wives in suspicion for her bad deeds."

"Alas!" said Ulysses, "there seems to be a fatality in your royal house of
Atreus, and that they are hated of Jove for their wives. For Helen's sake,
your brother Menelaus's wife, what multitudes fell in the wars of Troy!"

Agamemnon replied, "For this cause be not thou more kind than wise to any
woman. Let not thy words express to her at any time all that is in thy
mind, keep still some secrets to thyself. But thou by any bloody
contrivances of thy wife never needst fear to fall. Exceeding wise she is,
and to her wisdom she has a goodness as eminent; Icarius's daughter,
Penelope the chaste: we left her a young bride when we parted from our
wives to go to the wars, her first child sucking at her breast, the young
Telemachus, whom you shall see grown up to manhood on your return, and he
shall greet his father with befitting welcomes. My Orestes, my dear son, I
shall never see again. His mother has deprived his father of the sight of
him, and perhaps will slay him as she slew his sire. It is now no world to
trust a woman in. But what says fame? is my son yet alive? lives he in
Orchomen, or in Pylus, or is he resident in Sparta, in his uncle's court?
As yet, I see, divine Orestes is not here with me."

To this Ulysses replied that he had received no certain tidings where
Orestes abode, only some uncertain rumours which he could not report for
truth.

While they held this sad conference, with kind tears striving to render
unkind fortunes more palatable, the soul of great Achilles joined them.
"What desperate adventure has brought Ulysses to these regions," said
Achilles; "to see the end of dead men, and their foolish shades?"

Ulysses answered him that he had come to consult Tiresias respecting his
voyage home. "But thou, O son of Thetis," said he, "why dost thou
disparage the state of the dead? Seeing that as alive thou didst surpass
all men in glory, thou must needs retain thy pre-eminence here below: so
great Achilles triumphs over death."

But Achilles made reply that he had much rather be a peasant slave upon
the earth than reign over all the dead. So much did the inactivity and
slothful condition of that state displease his unquenchable and restless
spirit. Only he inquired of Ulysses if his father Peleus were living, and
how his son Neoptolemus conducted himself.

Of Peleus Ulysses could tell him nothing; but of Neoptolemus he thus bore
witness: "From Scyros I convoyed your son by sea to the Greeks: where I
can speak of him, for I knew him. He was chief in council, and in the
field. When any question was proposed, so quick was his conceit in the
forward apprehension of any case, that he ever spoke first, and was heard
with more attention than the older heads. Only myself and aged Nestor
could compare with him in giving advice. In battle I cannot speak his
praise, unless I could count all that fell by his sword. I will only
mention one instance of his manhood. When we sat hid in the belly of the
wooden horse, in the ambush which deceived the Trojans to their
destruction, I, who had the management of that stratagem, still shifted my
place from side to side to note the behaviour of our men. In some I marked
their hearts trembling, through all the pains which they took to appear
valiant, and in others tears, that in spite of manly courage would gush
forth. And to say truth, it was an adventure of high enterprise, and as
perilous a stake as was ever played in war's game. But in him I could not
observe the least sign of weakness, no tears nor tremblings, but his hand
still on his good sword, and ever urging me to set open the machine and
let us out before the time was come for doing it; and when we sallied out
he was still first in that fierce destruction and bloody midnight
desolation of king Priam's city."

This made the soul of Achilles to tread a swifter pace, with high-raised
feet, as he vanished away, for the joy which he took in his son being
applauded by Ulysses.

A sad shade stalked by, which Ulysses knew to be the ghost of Ajax, his
opponent, when living, in that famous dispute about the right of
succeeding to the arms of the deceased Achilles. They being adjudged by
the Greeks to Ulysses, as the prize of wisdom above bodily strength, the
noble Ajax in despite went mad, and slew himself. The sight of his rival
turned to a shade by his dispute so subdued the passion of emulation in
Ulysses that for his sake he wished that judgment in that controversy had
been given against himself, rather than so illustrious a chief should have
perished for the desire of those arms which his prowess (second only to
Achilles in fight) so eminently had deserved. "Ajax," he cried, "all the
Greeks mourn for thee as much as they lamented for Achilles. Let not thy
wrath burn forever, great son of Telamon. Ulysses seeks peace with thee,
and will make any atonement to thee that can appease thy hurt spirit." But
the shade stalked on, and would not exchange a word with Ulysses, though
he prayed it with many tears and many earnest entreaties. "He might have
spoke to me," said Ulysses, "since I spoke to him; but I see the
resentments of the dead are eternal."

Then Ulysses saw a throne on which was placed a judge distributing
sentence. He that sat on the throne was Minos, and he was dealing out just
judgments to the dead. He it is that assigns them their place in bliss or
woe.

Then came by a thundering ghost, the large-limbed Orion, the mighty
hunter, who was hunting there the ghosts of the beasts which he had
slaughtered in desert hills upon the earth. For the dead delight in the
occupations which pleased them in the time of their living upon the earth.

There was Tityus suffering eternal pains because he had sought to violate
the honour of Latona, as she passed from Pytho into Panopeus. Two vultures
sat perpetually preying upon his liver with their crooked beaks; which as
fast as they devoured, is forever renewed; nor can he fray them away with
his great hands.

There was Tantalus, plagued for his great sins, standing up to his chin in
water, which he can never taste, but still as he bows his head, thinking
to quench his burning thirst, instead of water he licks up unsavory dust.
All fruits pleasant to the sight, and of delicious flavor, hang in ripe
clusters about his head, seeming as though they offered themselves to be
plucked by him; but when he reaches out his hand, some wind carries them
far out of his sight into the clouds; so he is starved in the midst of
plenty by the righteous doom of Jove, in memory of that inhuman banquet at
which the sun turned pale, when the unnatural father served up the limbs
of his little son in a dish, as meat for his divine guests.

There was Sisyphus, that sees no end to his labours. His punishment is, to
be forever rolling up a vast stone to the top of a mountain, which, when
it gets to the top, falls down with a crushing weight, and all his work is
to be begun again. He was bathed all over in sweat, that reeked out a
smoke which covered his head like a mist. His crime had been the revealing
of state secrets.

There Ulysses saw Hercules--not that Hercules who enjoys immortal life in
heaven among the gods, and is married to Hebe or Youth; but his shadow,
which remains below. About him the dead flocked as thick as bats, hovering
around, and cuffing at his head: he stands with his dreadful bow, ever in
the act to shoot.

There also might Ulysses have seen and spoken with the shades of Theseus,
and Pirithous, and the old heroes; but he had conversed enough with
horrors; therefore, covering his face with his hands, that he might see no
more spectres, he resumed his seat in his ship, and pushed off. The bark
moved of itself without the help of any oar, and soon brought him out of
the regions of death into the cheerful quarters of the living, and to the
island of Aeaea, whence he had set forth.




CHAPTER THREE

The Song of the Sirens.--Scylla and Charybdis.--The Oxen of the Sun.--The
Judgment.--The Crew Killed by Lightning.


"Unhappy man, who at thy birth wast appointed twice to die! others shall
die once; but thou, besides that death that remains for thee, common to
all men, hast in thy lifetime visited the shades of death. Thee Scylla,
thee Charybdis, expect. Thee the deathful Sirens lie in wait for, that
taint the minds of whoever listen to them with their sweet singing.
Whosoever shall but hear the call of any Siren, he will so despise both
wife and children through their sorceries that the stream of his affection
never again shall set homewards, nor shall he take joy in wife or children
thereafter, or they in him."

With these prophetic greetings great Circe met Ulysses on his return. He
besought her to instruct him in the nature of the Sirens, and by what
method their baneful allurements were to be resisted.

"They are sisters three," she replied, "that sit in a mead (by which your
ship must needs pass) circled with dead men's bones. These are the bones
of men whom they have slain, after with fawning invitements they have
enticed them into their fen. Yet such is the celestial harmony of their
voice accompanying the persuasive magic of their words, that, knowing
this, you shall not be able to withstand their enticements. Therefore,
when you are to sail by them, you shall stop the ears of your companions
with wax, that they may hear no note of that dangerous music; but for
yourself, that you may hear, and yet live, give them strict command to
bind you hand and foot to the mast, and in no case to set you free, till
you are out of the danger of the temptation, though you should entreat it,
and implore it ever so much, but to bind you rather the more for your
requesting to be loosed. So shall you escape that snare."

Ulysses then prayed her that she would inform him what Scylla and
Charybdis were, which she had taught him by name to fear. She replied:
"Sailing from Aeaea to Trinacria, you must pass at an equal distance
between two fatal rocks. Incline never so little either to the one side or
the other, and your ship must meet with certain destruction. No vessel
ever yet tried that pass without being lost but the Argo, which owed her
safety to the sacred freight she bore, the fleece of the golden-backed
ram, which could not perish. The biggest of these rocks which you shall
come to, Scylla hath in charge. There in a deep whirlpool at the foot of
the rock the abhorred monster shrouds her face; who if she were to show
her full form, no eye of man or god could endure the sight: thence she
stretches out all her six long necks, peering and diving to suck up fish,
dolphins, dog-fish, and whales, whole ships, and their men, whatever comes
within her raging gulf. The other rock is lesser, and of less ominous
aspect; but there dreadful Charybdis sits, supping the black deeps. Thrice
a day she drinks her pits dry, and thrice a day again she belches them all
up; but when she is drinking, come not nigh, for, being once caught, the
force of Neptune cannot redeem you from her swallow. Better trust to
Scylla, for she will but have for her six necks six men: Charybdis in her
insatiate draught will ask all."

Then Ulysses inquired, in case he should escape Charybdis, whether he
might not assail that other monster with his sword; to which she replied
that he must not think that he had an enemy subject to death, or wounds,
to contend with, for Scylla could never die. Therefore, his best safety
was in flight, and to invoke none of the gods but Gratis, who is Scylla's
mother, and might perhaps forbid her daughter to devour them. For his
conduct after he arrived at Trinacria she referred him to the admonitions
which had been given him by Tiresias.

Ulysses having communicated her instructions, as far as related to the
Sirens, to his companions, who had not been present at that interview--but
concealing from them the rest, as he had done the terrible predictions of
Tiresias, that they might not be deterred by fear from pursuing their
voyage--the time for departure being come, they set their sails, and took
a final leave of great Circe; who by her art calmed the heavens, and gave
them smooth seas, and a right forewind (the seaman's friend) to bear them
on their way to Ithaca.

They had not sailed past a hundred leagues before the breeze which Circe
had lent them suddenly stopped. It was stricken dead. All the sea lay in
prostrate slumber. Not a gasp of air could be felt. The ship stood still.
Ulysses guessed that the island of the Sirens was not far off, and that
they had charmed the air so with their devilish singing. Therefore he made
him cakes of wax, as Circe had instructed him, and stopped the ears of his
men with them; then causing himself to be bound hand and foot, he
commanded the rowers to ply their oars and row as fast as speed could
carry them past that fatal shore. They soon came within sight of the
Sirens, who sang in Ulysses's hearing:

  Come here, thou, worthy of a world of praise,
  That dost so high the Grecian glory raise,
  Ulysses' stay thy ship, and that song hear
  That none pass'd ever, but it bent his ear,
  But left him ravish'd, and instructed more
  By us than any ever heard before.
  For we know all things, whatsoever were
  In wide Troy labor'd, whatsoever there
  The Grecians and the Trojans both sustain'd,
  By those high issues that the gods ordain'd;
  And whatsoever all the earth can show
  To inform a knowledge of desert, we know.

These were the words, but the celestial harmony of the voices which sang
them no tongue can describe: it took the ear of Ulysses with ravishment.
He would have broken his bonds to rush after them; and threatened, wept,
sued, entreated, commanded, crying out with tears and passionate
imprecations, conjuring his men by all the ties of perils past which they
had endured in common, by fellowship and love, and the authority which he
retained among them, to let him loose; but at no rate would they obey him.
And still the Sirens sang. Ulysses made signs, motions, gestures,
promising mountains of gold if they would set him free; but their oars
only moved faster. And still the Sirens sang. And still the more he
adjured them to set him free, the faster with cords and ropes they bound
him; till they were quite out of hearing of the Sirens' notes, whose
effect great Circe had so truly predicted. And well she might speak of
them, for often she has joined her own enchanting voice to theirs, while
she has sat in the flowery meads, mingled with the Sirens and the Water
Nymphs, gathering their potent herbs and drugs of magic quality: their
singing altogether has made the gods stoop, and "heaven drowsy with the
harmony."

[Illustration: _He would have broken his bonds to rush after them_.]

Escaped that peril, they had not sailed yet a hundred leagues farther,
when they heard a roar afar off, which Ulysses knew to be the barking of
Scylla's dogs, which surround her waist, and bark incessantly. Coming
nearer they beheld a smoke ascend, with a horrid murmur, which arose from
that other whirlpool, to which they made nigher approaches than to Scylla.
Through the furious eddy, which is in that place, the ship stood still as
a stone, for there was no man to lend his hand to an oar, the dismal roar
of Scylla's dogs at a distance, and the nearer clamours of Charybdis,
where everything made an echo, quite taking from them the power of
exertion. Ulysses went up and down encouraging his men, one by one, giving
them good words, telling them that they were in greater perils when they
were blocked up in the Cyclop's cave, yet, Heaven assisting his counsels,
he had delivered them out of that extremity. That he could not believe but
they remembered it; and wished them to give the same trust to the same
care which he had now for their welfare. That they must exert all the
strength and wit which they had, and try if Jove would not grant them an
escape even out of this peril. In particular, he cheered up the pilot who
sat at the helm, and told him that he must show more firmness than other
men, as he had more trust committed to him, and had the sole management by
his skill of the vessel in which all their safeties were embarked. That a
rock lay hid within those boiling whirlpools which he saw, on the outside
of which he must steer, if he would avoid his own destruction and the
destruction of them all.

They heard him, and like men took to the oars; but little knew what
opposite danger, in shunning that rock, they must be thrown upon. For
Ulysses had concealed from them the wounds, never to be healed, which
Scylla was to open: their terror would else have robbed them all of all
care to steer or move an oar, and have made them hide under the hatches,
for fear of seeing her, where he and they must have died an idle death.
But even then he forgot the precautions which Circe had given him to
prevent harm to his person, who had willed him not to arm, or show himself
once to Scylla; but disdaining not to venture life for his brave
companions, he could not contain, but armed in all points, and taking a
lance in either hand, he went up to the fore-deck, and looked when Scylla
would appear.

She did not show herself as yet, and still the vessel steered closer by
her rock, as it sought to shun that other more dreaded; for they saw how
horribly Charybdis' black throat drew into her all the whirling deep,
which she disgorged again, that all about her boiled like a kettle, and
the rock roared with troubled waters; which when she supped in again, all
the bottom turned up, and disclosed far under shore the swart sands naked,
whose whole stern sight frayed the startled blood from their faces, and
made Ulysses turn to view the wonder of whirlpools. Which when Scylla saw,
from out her black den she darted out her six long necks, and swooped up
as many of his friends: whose cries Ulysses heard, and saw them too late,
with their heels turned up, and their hands thrown to him for succour, who
had been their help in all extremities, but could not deliver them now;
and he heard them shriek out, as she tore them, and to the last they
continued to throw their hands out to him for sweet life. In all his
sufferings he never had beheld a sight so full of miseries.

Escaped from Scylla and Charybdis, but with a diminished crew, Ulysses and
the sad remains of his followers reached the Trinacrian shore. Here
landing, he beheld oxen grazing of such surpassing size and beauty that,
both from them and from the shape of the Island (having three promontories
jutting into the sea), he judged rightly that he was come to the
Triangular island and the oxen of the Sun, of which Tiresias had
forewarned him.

So great was his terror lest through his own fault, or that of his men,
any violence or profanation should be offered to the holy oxen, that even
then, tired as they were with the perils and fatigues of the day past, and
unable to stir an oar, or use any exertion, and though night was fast
coming on, he would have had them re-embark immediately, and make the best
of their way from that dangerous station; but his men with one voice
resolutely opposed it, and even the too cautious Eurylochus himself
withstood the proposal; so much did the temptation of a little ease and
refreshment (ease tenfold sweet after such labours) prevail over the
sagest counsels, and the apprehension of certain evil outweigh the
prospect of contingent danger. They expostulated that the nerves of
Ulysses seemed to be made of steel, and his limbs not liable to lassitude
like other men's; that waking or sleeping seemed indifferent to him; but
that they were men, not gods, and felt the common appetites for food and
sleep. That in the night-time all the winds most destructive to ships are
generated. That black night still required to be served with meat, and
sleep, and quiet havens, and ease. That the best sacrifice to the sea was
in the morning. With such sailor-like sayings and mutinous arguments,
which the majority have always ready to justify disobedience to their
betters, they forced Ulysses to comply with their requisition, and against
his will to take up his night-quarters on shore. But he first exacted from
them an oath that they would neither maim nor kill any of the cattle which
they saw grazing, but content themselves with such food as Circe had
stowed their vessel with when they parted from Aeaea. This they man by man
severally promised, imprecating the heaviest curses on whoever should
break it; and mooring their bark within a creek, they went to supper,
contenting themselves that night with such food as Circe had given them,
not without many sad thoughts of their friends whom Scylla had devoured,
the grief of which kept them great part of the night waking.

In the morning Ulysses urged them again to a religious observance of the
oath that they had sworn, not in any case to attempt the blood of those
fair herds which they saw grazing, but to content themselves with the
ship's food; for the god who owned those cattle sees and hears all.

They faithfully obeyed, and remained in that good mind for a month, during
which they were confined to that station by contrary winds, till all the
wine and the bread were gone which they had brought with them. When their
victuals were gone, necessity compelled them to stray in quest of whatever
fish or fowl they could snare, which that coast did not yield in any great
abundance. Then Ulysses prayed to all the gods that dwelt in bountiful
heaven, that they would be pleased to yield them some means to stay their
hunger without having recourse to profane and forbidden violations; but
the ears of heaven seemed to be shut, or some god incensed plotted his
ruin; for at midday, when he should chiefly have been vigilant and
watchful to prevent mischief, a deep sleep fell upon the eyes of Ulysses,
during which he lay totally insensible of all that passed in the world,
and what his friends or what his enemies might do for his welfare or
destruction. Then Eurylochus took his advantage. He was the man of most
authority with them after Ulysses. He represented to them all the misery
of their condition; how that every death is hateful and grievous to
mortality, but that of all deaths famine is attended with the most
painful, loathsome, and humiliating circumstances; that the subsistence
which they could hope to draw from fowling or fishing was too precarious
to be depended upon; that there did not seem to be any chance of the winds
changing to favour their escape, but that they must inevitably stay there
and perish, if they let an irrational superstition deter them from the
means which nature offered to their hands; that Ulysses might be deceived
in his belief that these oxen had any sacred qualities above other oxen;
and even admitting that they were the property of the god of the Sun, as
he said they were, the Sun did neither eat nor drink, and the gods were
best served not by a scrupulous conscience, but by a thankful heart, which
took freely what they as freely offered: with these and such like
persuasions he prevailed on his half-famished and half-mutinous companions
to begin the impious violation of their oath by the slaughter of seven of
the fairest of these oxen which were grazing. Part they roasted and eat,
and part they offered in sacrifice to the gods, particularly to Apollo,
god of the Sun, vowing to build a temple to his godhead when they should
arrive in Ithaca, and deck it with magnificent and numerous gifts. Vain
men! and superstition worse than that which they so lately derided! to
imagine that prospective penitence can excuse a present violation of duty,
and that the pure natures of the heavenly powers will admit of compromise
or dispensation for sin.

But to their feast they fell, dividing the roasted portions of the flesh,
savoury and pleasant meat to them, but a sad sight to the eyes, and a
savour of death in the nostrils, of the waking Ulysses, who just woke in
time to witness, but not soon enough to prevent, their rash and
sacrilegious banquet. He had scarce time to ask what great mischief was
this which they had done unto him; when behold, a prodigy! the ox-hides
which they had stripped began to creep as if they had life; and the
roasted flesh bellowed as the ox used to do when he was living. The hair
of Ulysses stood up on end with affright at these omens; but his
companions, like men whom the gods had infatuated to their destruction,
persisted in their horrible banquet.

The Sun from his burning chariot saw how Ulysses's men had slain his oxen,
and he cried to his father Jove, "Revenge me upon these impious men who
have slain my oxen, which it did me good to look upon when I walked my
heavenly round. In all my daily course I never saw such bright and
beautiful creatures as those my oxen were." The father promised that ample
retribution should be taken of those accursed men: which was fulfilled
shortly after, when they took their leaves of the fatal island.

Six days they feasted in spite of the signs of heaven, and on the seventh,
the wind changing, they set their sails and left the island; and their
hearts were cheerful with the banquets they had held; all but the heart of
Ulysses, which sank within him, as with wet eyes he beheld his friends,
and gave them for lost, as men devoted to divine vengeance. Which soon
overtook them; for they had not gone many leagues before a dreadful
tempest arose, which burst their cables; down came their mast, crushing
the skull of the pilot in its fall; off he fell from the stern into the
water, and the bark wanting his management drove along at the wind's
mercy; thunders roared, and terrible lightnings of Jove came down; first a
bolt struck Eurylochus, then another, and then another, till all the crew
were killed, and their bodies swam about like sea-mews; and the ship was
split in pieces. Only Ulysses survived; and he had no hope of safety but
in tying himself to the mast, where he sat riding upon the waves, like one
that in no extremity would yield to fortune. Nine days was he floating
about with all the motions of the sea, with no other support than the
slender mast under him, till the tenth night cast him, all spent and weary
with toil, upon the friendly shores of the island Ogygia.

[Illustration: _Nine days was he floating about with all the motions of
the sea_.]




CHAPTER FOUR

The Island of Calypso.--Immortality Refused.


Henceforth the adventures of the single Ulysses must be pursued. Of all
those faithful partakers of his toil, who with him left Asia, laden with
the spoils of Troy, now not one remains, but all a prey to the remorseless
waves, and food for some great fish; their gallant navy reduced to one
ship, and that finally swallowed up and lost. Where now are all their
anxious thoughts of home? that perseverance with which they went through
the severest sufferings and the hardest labours to which poor seafarers
were ever exposed, that their toils at last might be crowned with the
sight of their native shores and wives at Ithaca! Ulysses is now in the
isle Ogygia, called the Delightful Island. The poor shipwrecked chief, the
slave of all the elements, is once again raised by the caprice of fortune
into a shadow of prosperity. He that was cast naked upon the shore, bereft
of all his companions, has now a goddess to attend upon him, and his
companions are the nymphs which never die. Who has not heard of Calypso?
her grove crowned with alders and poplars; her grotto, against which the
luxuriant vine laid forth his purple grapes; her ever new delights,
crystal fountains, running brooks, meadows flowering with sweet
balm--gentle and with violet; blue violets which like veins enamelled the
smooth breasts of each fragrant mead! It were useless to describe over
again what has been so well told already; or to relate those soft arts
of courtship which the goddess used to detain Ulysses; the same in kind
which she afterwards practised upon his less wary son, whom Minerva, in
the shape of Mentor, hardly preserved from her snares, when they came to
the Delightful Island together in search of the scarce departed Ulysses.

A memorable example of married love, and a worthy instance how dear to
every good man his country is, was exhibited by Ulysses. If Circe loved
him sincerely, Calypso loves him with tenfold more warmth and passion: she
can deny him nothing, but his departure; she offers him everything, even
to a participation of her immortality--if he will stay and share in her
pleasures, he shall never die. But death with glory has greater charms for
a mind heroic than a life that shall never die with shame; and when he
pledged his vows to his Penelope, he reserved no stipulation that he would
forsake her whenever a goddess should think him worthy of her bed, but
they had sworn to live and grow old together; and he would not survive her
if he could, no meanly share in immortality itself, from which she was
excluded.

These thoughts kept him pensive and melancholy in the midst of pleasure.
His heart was on the seas, making voyages to Ithaca. Twelve months had
worn away, when Minerva from heaven saw her favourite, how he sat still
pining on the seashores (his daily custom), wishing for a ship to carry
him home. She (who is wisdom herself) was indignant that so wise and brave
a man as Ulysses should be held in effeminate bondage by an unworthy
goddess; and at her request her father Jove ordered Mercury to go down to
the earth to command Calypso to dismiss her guest. The divine messenger
tied fast to his feet his winged shoes, which bear him over land and seas,
and took in his hand his golden rod, the ensign of his authority. Then
wheeling in many an airy round, he stayed not till he alighted on the firm
top of the mountain Pieria; thence he fetched a second circuit over the
seas, kissing the waves in his flight with his feet, as light as any
sea-mew fishing dips her wings, till he touched the isle Ogygia, and
soared up from the blue sea to the grotto of the goddess to whom his
errand was ordained.

His message struck a horror, checked by love, through all the faculties of
Calypso. She replied to it, incensed: "You gods are insatiate, past all
that live, in all things which you affect; which makes you so envious and
grudging. It afflicts you to the heart when any goddess seeks the love of
a mortal man in marriage, though you yourselves without scruple link
yourselves to women of the earth. So it fared with you, when the
delicious-fingered Morning shared Orion's bed; you could never satisfy
your hate and your jealousy till you had incensed the chastity-loving
dame, Diana, who leads the precise life, to come upon him by stealth in
Ortygia, and pierce him through with her arrows. And when rich-haired
Ceres gave the reins to her affections, and took Iasion (well worthy) to
her arms, the secret was not so cunningly kept but Jove had soon notice of
it, and the poor mortal paid for his felicity with death, struck through
with lightnings. And now you envy me the possession of a wretched man whom
tempests have cast upon my shores, making him lawfully mine; whose ship
Jove rent in pieces with his hot thunderbolts, killing all his friends.
Him I have preserved, loved, nourished; made him mine by protection, my
creature; by every tie of gratitude, mine; have vowed to make him
deathless like myself; him you will take from me. But I know your power,
and that it is vain for me to resist. Tell your king that I obey his
mandates."

With an ill grace Calypso promised to fulfil the commands of Jove; and,
Mercury departing, she went to find Ulysses, where he sat outside the
grotto, not knowing of the heavenly message, drowned in discontent, not
seeing any human probability of his ever returning home.

She said to him: "Unhappy man, no longer afflict yourself with pining
after your country, but build you a ship, with which you may return home,
since it is the will of the gods; who, doubtless, as they are greater in
power than I, are greater in skill, and best can tell what is fittest for
man. But I call the gods and my inward conscience to witness that I have
no thought but what stood with thy safety, nor would have done or
counselled anything against thy good. I persuaded thee to nothing which
I should not have followed myself in thy extremity; for my mind is
innocent and simple. O, if thou knewest what dreadful sufferings thou must
yet endure before ever thou reachest thy native land, thou wouldest not
esteem so hardly of a goddess's offer to share her immortality with thee;
nor, for a few years' enjoyment of a perishing Penelope, refuse an
imperishable and never-dying life with Calypso."

He replied: "Ever-honoured, great Calypso, let it not displease thee, that
I a mortal man desire to see and converse again with a wife that is
mortal: human objects are best fitted to human infirmities. I well know
how far in wisdom, in feature, in stature, proportion, beauty, in all the
gifts of the mind, thou exceedest my Penelope: she is a mortal, and
subject to decay; thou immortal, ever growing, yet never old; yet in her
sight all my desires terminate, all my wishes--in the sight of her, and of
my country earth. If any god, envious of my return, shall lay his dreadful
hand upon me as I pass the seas, I submit; for the same powers have given
me a mind not to sink under oppression. In wars and waves my sufferings
have not been small."

She heard his pleaded reasons, and of force she must assent; so to her
nymphs she gave in charge from her sacred woods to cut down timber, to
make Ulysses a ship. They obeyed, though in a work unsuitable to their
soft fingers, yet to obedience no sacrifice is hard; and Ulysses busily
bestirred himself, labouring far more hard than they, as was fitting, till
twenty tall trees, driest and fittest for timber, were felled. Then, like
a skilful shipwright, he fell to joining the planks, using the plane, the
axe, and the auger with such expedition that in four days' time a ship was
made, complete with all her decks, hatches, sideboards, yards. Calypso
added linen for the sails, and tackling; and when she was finished, she
was a goodly vessel for a man to sail in, alone or in company, over the
wide seas. By the fifth morning she was launched; and Ulysses, furnished
with store of provisions, rich garments, and gold and silver, given him by
Calypso, took a last leave of her and of her nymphs, and of the isle
Ogygia which had so befriended him.

[Illustration: _Took a last leave of her and of her nymphs_.]




CHAPTER FIVE

The Tempest.--The Sea-bird's Gift.--The Escape by Swimming.--The Sleep in
the Woods.


At the stern of his solitary ship Ulysses sat, and steered right artfully.
No sleep could seize his eyelids. He beheld the Pleiads, the Bear, which
is by some called the Wain, that moves round about Orion, and keeps still
above the ocean, and the slow-setting sign Bootes, which some name the
Wagoner. Seventeen days he held his course, and on the eighteenth the
coast of Phaeacia was in sight. The figure of the land, as seen from the
sea, was pretty and circular, and looked something like a shield.

Neptune, returning from visiting his favourite Aethiopians, from the
mountains of the Solymi, descried Ulysses ploughing the waves, his domain.
The sight of the man he so much hated for Polyphemus's sake, his son,
whose eye Ulysses had put out, set the god's heart on fire; and snatching
into his hand his horrid sea-sceptre, the trident of his power, he smote
the air and the sea, and conjured up all his black storms, calling down
night from the cope of heaven, and taking the earth into the sea, as it
seemed, with clouds, through the darkness and indistinctness which
prevailed; the billows rolling up before the fury of all the winds, that
contended together in their mighty sport.

Then the knees of Ulysses bent with fear, and then all his spirit was
spent, and he wished that he had been among the number of his countrymen
who fell before Troy, and had their funerals celebrated by all the Greeks,
rather than to perish thus, where no man could mourn him or know him.

As he thought these melancholy thoughts, a huge wave took him and washed
him overboard, ship and all upset amidst the billows, he struggling afar
off, clinging to her stern broken off which he yet held, her mast cracking
in two with the fury of that gust of mixed winds that struck it, sails and
sailyards fell into the deep, and he himself was long drowned under water,
nor could get his head above, wave so met with wave, as if they strove
which should depress him most; and the gorgeous garments given him by
Calypso clung about him, and hindered his swimming; yet neither for this,
nor for the overthrow of his ship, nor his own perilous condition, would
he give up his drenched vessel; but, wrestling with Neptune, got at length
hold of her again, and then sat in her hull, insulting over death, which
he had escaped, and the salt waves which he gave the seas again to give to
other men; his ship, striving to live, floated at random, cuffed from wave
to wave, hurled to and fro by all the winds: now Boreas tossed it to
Notus, Notus passed it to Eurus, and Eurus to the West Wind, who kept up
the horrid tennis.

Them in their mad sport Ino Leucothea beheld--Ino Leucothea, now a
sea-goddess, but once a mortal and the daughter of Cadmus; she with pity
beheld Ulysses the mark of their fierce contention, and rising from the
waves alighted on the ship, in shape like to the sea-bird which is called
a cormorant; and in her beak she held a wonderful girdle made of
sea-weeds, which grow at the bottom of the ocean, which she dropped at his
feet; and the bird spake to Ulysses, and counselled him not to trust any
more to that fatal vessel against which god Neptune had levelled his
furious wrath, nor to those ill-befriending garments which Calypso had
given him, but to quit both it and them, and trust for his safety to
swimming. "And here," said the seeming bird, "take this girdle and tie
about your middle, which has virtue to protect the wearer at sea, and you
shall safely reach the shore; but when you have landed, cast it far from
you back into the sea." He did as the sea-bird instructed him; he stripped
himself naked, and, fastening the wondrous girdle about his middle, cast
himself into the seas to swim. The bird dived past his sight into the
fathomless abyss of the ocean.

Two days and two nights he spent in struggling with the waves, though sore
buffeted, and almost spent, never giving up himself for lost, such
confidence he had in that charm which he wore about his middle, and in the
words of that divine bird. But the third morning the winds grew calm and
all the heavens were clear. Then he saw himself nigh land, which he knew
to be the coast of the Phaeacians, a people good to strangers and
abounding in ships, by whose favour he doubted not that he should soon
obtain a passage to his own country. And such joy he conceived in his
heart as good sons have that esteem their father's life dear, when long
sickness has held him down to his bed and wasted his body, and they see at
length health return to the old man, with restored strength and spirits,
in reward of their many prayers to the gods for his safety: so precious
was the prospect of home-return to Ulysses, that he might restore health
to his country (his better parent), that had long languished as full of
distempers in his absence. And then for his own safety's sake he had joy
to see the shores, the woods, so nigh and within his grasp as they seemed,
and he laboured with all the might of hands and feet to reach with
swimming that nigh-seeming land.

But when he approached near, a horrid sound of a huge sea beating against
rocks informed him that here was no place for landing, nor any harbour for
man's resort, but through the weeds and the foam which the sea belched up
against the land he could dimly discover the rugged shore all bristled
with flints, and all that part of the coast one impending rock that seemed
impossible to climb, and the water all about so deep that not a sand was
there for any tired foot to rest upon, and every moment he feared lest
some wave more cruel than the rest should crush him against a cliff,
rendering worse than vain all his landing; and should he swim to seek a
more commodious haven farther on, he was fearful lest, weak and spent as
he was, the winds would force him back a long way off into the main, where
the terrible god Neptune, for wrath that he had so nearly escaped his
power, having gotten him again into his domain, would send out some great
whale (of which those seas breed a horrid number) to swallow him up alive;
with such malignity he still pursued him.

While these thoughts distracted him with diversity of dangers, one bigger
wave drove against a sharp rock his naked body, which it gashed and tore,
and wanted little of breaking all his bones, so rude was the shock. But in
this extremity she prompted him that never failed him at need. Minerva
(who is wisdom itself) put it into his thoughts no longer to keep swimming
off and on, as one dallying with danger, but boldly to force the shore
that threatened him, and to hug the rock that had torn him so rudely;
which with both hands he clasped, wrestling with extremity, till the rage
of that billow which had driven him upon it was passed; but then again the
rock drove back that wave so furiously that it reft him of his hold,
sucking him with it in its return; and the sharp rock, his cruel friend,
to which he clung for succour, rent the flesh so sore from his hands in
parting that he fell off, and could sustain no longer; quite under water
he fell, and, past the help of fate, there had the hapless Ulysses lost
all portion that he had in this life, if Minerva had not prompted his
wisdom in that peril to essay another course, and to explore some other
shelter, ceasing to attempt that landing-place.

She guided his wearied and nigh-exhausted limbs to the mouth of the fair
river Callicoe, which not far from thence disbursed its watery tribute to
the ocean. Here the shores were easy and accessible, and the rocks, which
rather adorned than defended its banks, so smooth that they seemed
polished of purpose to invite the landing of our sea-wanderer, and to
atone for the uncourteous treatment which those less hospitable cliffs had
afforded him. And the god of the river, as if in pity, stayed his current,
and smoothed his waters, to make his landing more easy; for sacred to the
ever-living deities of the fresh waters, be they mountain-stream, river,
or lake, is the cry of erring mortals that seek their aid, by reason that,
being inland-bred, they partake more of the gentle humanities of our
nature than those marine deities whom Neptune trains up in tempests in the
unpitying recesses of his salt abyss.

So by the favour of the river's god Ulysses crept to land half-drowned;
both his knees faltering, his strong hands falling down through weakness
from the excessive toils he had endured, his cheeks and nostrils flowing
with froth of the sea-brine, much of which he had swallowed in that
conflict, voice and breath spent, down he sank as in death. Dead weary he
was. It seemed that the sea had soaked through his heart, and the pains he
felt in all his veins were little less than those which one feels that has
endured the torture of the rack. But when his spirits came a little to
themselves, and his recollection by degrees began to return, he rose up,
and unloosing from his waist the girdle or charm which that divine bird
had given him, and remembering the charge which he had received with it,
he flung it far from him into the river. Back it swam with the course of
the ebbing stream till it reached the sea, where the fair hands of Ino
Leucothea received it to keep it as a pledge of safety to any future
shipwrecked mariner that, like Ulysses, should wander in those perilous
waves.

Then he kissed the humble earth in token of safety, and on he went by the
side of that pleasant river, till he came where a thicker shade of rushes
that grew on its banks seemed to point out the place where he might rest
his sea-wearied limbs. And here a fresh perplexity divided his mind,
whether he should pass the night, which was coming on, in that place,
where, though he feared no other enemies, the damps and frosts of the
chill sea-air in that exposed situation might be death to him in his weak
state; or whether he had better climb the next hill, and pierce the depth
of some shady wood, in which he might find a warm and sheltered though
insecure repose, subject to the approach of any wild beast that roamed
that way. Best did this last course appear to him, though with some
danger, as that which was more honourable and savoured more of strife and
self-exertion than to perish without a struggle the passive victim of cold
and the elements.

So he bent his course to the nearest woods, where, entering in, he found a
thicket, mostly of wild olives and such low trees, yet growing so
intertwined and knit together that the moist wind had not leave to play
through their branches, nor the sun's scorching beams to pierce their
recesses, nor any shower to beat through, they grew so thick, and as it
were folded each in the other; here creeping in, he made his bed of the
leaves which were beginning to fall, of which was such abundance that two
or three men might have spread them ample coverings, such as might shield
them from the winter's rage, though the air breathed steel and blew as it
would burst. Here creeping in, he heaped up store of leaves all about him,
as a man would billets upon a winter fire, and lay down in the midst. Rich
seed of virtue lying hid in poor leaves! Here Minerva soon gave him sound
sleep; and here all his long toils past seemed to be concluded and shut up
within the little sphere of his refreshed and closed eyelids.



