

JULY. ÆGLOGA SEPTIMA. ARGUMENT.

This Æglogue is made in the honour and commendation of good shepheards,
and to the shame and dispraise of proud and ambitious pastors: such as
Morrell is here imagined to be.


    THOMALIN. MORRELL.[11]

    THOMALIN.
    Is not thilk same a goatherd proud,
      That sits on yonder bank,
    Whose straying herd them self doth shroud
      Among the bushes rank?
    MOR. What, ho, thou jolly shepheard's swain,
      Come up the hill to me;
    Better is than the lowly plain,
      Als for thy flock and thee.
    THOM. Ah! God shield, man, that I should climb,
      And learn to look aloft;
    This rede is rife, that oftentime
      Great climbers fall unsoft.
    In humble dales is footing fast,
      The trode is not so tickle,
    And though one fall through heedless hast,
      Yet is his miss not mickle.
    And now the Sun[12] hath reared up
      His fiery-footed team,
    Making his way between the Cup
      And golden Diademe;
    The rampant Lion hunts he fast,
      With dogs of noisome breath,
    Whose baleful barking brings in hast
      Pine, plagues, and dreary death.
    Against his cruel scorching heat,
      Where thou hast coverture,
    The wasteful hills unto his threat
      Is a plain overture:
    But, if thee list to holden chat
      With seely shepheard's swain,
    Come down, and learn the little what,
      That Thomalin can sayn.
    MOR. Siker thou's but a lazy loord,
      And recks much of thy swink,
    That with fond terms, and witless words,
      To blear mine eyes dost think.
    In evil hour thou hentst in hand
      Thus holy hills to blame,
    For sacred unto saints they stand,
      And of them have their name.
    St. Michel's Mount who does not know,
      That wards the Western coast?
    And of St. Bridget's Bower I trow
      All Kent can rightly boast:
    And they that con of Muses' skill
      Sayn most-what, that they dwell
    (As goatherds wont) upon a hill,
      Beside a learned well.
    And wonned not the great good Pan
      Upon Mount Olivet,
    Feeding the blessed flock of Dan,
      Which did himself beget?
    THOM. O blessed Sheep! O Shepheard great!
      That bought his flock so dear,
    And them did save with bloody sweat
      From wolves that would them tear.
    MOR. Beside, as holy Fathers sayn,
      There is a holy place
    Where Titan riseth from the main
      To run his daily race,
    Upon whose top the stars be stay'd,
      And all the sky doth lean;
    There is the cave where Phœbe laid
      The shepheard long to dream.
    Whilome there used shepheards all
      To feed their flocks at will,
    Till by his folly one did fall,
      That all the rest did spill.
    And, sithens shepheards be foresaid
      From places of delight,
    Forthy I ween thou be afraid
      To climb this hillës height.
    Of Sinai can I tell thee more,
      And of our Lady's Bower;
    But little needs to strow my store,
      Suffice this hill of our.
    Here have the holy Fauns recourse,
      And Sylvans haunten rathe;
    Here has the salt Medway his source,
      Wherein the Nymphs do bathe;
    The salt Medway, that trickling streams
      Adown the dales of Kent,
    Till with his elder brother Themes
      His brackish waves be ment.
    Here grows melampode every where,
      And terebinth, good for goats;
    The one my madding kids to smear,
      The next to heal their throats.
    Hereto, the hills be nigher heaven,
      And then the passage eath;
    As well can prove the piercing levin,
      That seldom falls beneath.
    THOM. Siker thou speaks like a lewd lorrell,
      Of heaven to deemen so;
    How be I am but rude and borrell,
      Yet nearer ways I know.
    To kirk the narre, from God more far,
      Has been an old-said saw;
    And he, that strives to touch a star,
      Oft stumbles at a straw.
    As soon may shepheard climb to sky
      That leads in lowly dales,
    As goatherd proud, that, sitting high,
      Upon the mountain sails.
    My seely sheep like well below,
      They need not melampode,
    For they be hale enough, I trow,
      And liken their abode;
    But, if they with thy goats should yede,
      They soon might be corrupted,
    Or like not of the frowy feed,
      Or with the weeds be glutted.
    The hills, where dwelled holy saints,
      I reverence and adore,
    Not for themself, but for the saints
      Which have been dead of yore.
    And now they be to heaven forewent,
      Their good is with them go;
    Their sample only to us lent,
      That als we might do so.
    Shepheards they weren of the best,
      And lived in lowly leas;
    And, sith they souls be now at rest,
      Why do we them disease?
    Such one he was (as I have heard
      Old Algrind often sayn)
    That whilome was the first shepheard,
      And lived with little gain:
    And meek he was, as meek might be,
      Simple as simple sheep;
    Humble, and like in each degree
      The flock which he did keep.
    Often he used of his keep
      A sacrifice to bring,
    Now with a kid, now with a sheep,
      The altars hallowing.
    So louted he unto his Lord,
      Such favour couth he find,
    That never sithens was abhorr'd
     The simple shepheards' kind.
    And such, I ween, the brethren were
      That came from Canaän,
    The brethren Twelve, that kept yfere
      The flocks of mighty Pan.
    But nothing such thilk shepheard was
      Whom Ida hill did bear,
    That left his flock to fetch a lass,
      Whose love he bought too dear.
    For he was proud, that ill was paid,
      (No such must shepheards be!)
    And with lewd lust was overlaid;
      Two things doen ill agree.
    But shepheard must be meek and mild,
      Well-eyed, as Argus was,
    With fleshly follies undefiled,
      And stout as steed of brass.
    Such one (said Algrind) Moses was,
      That saw his Maker's face,
    His face, more clear then crystal glass,
      And spake to him in place.
    This had a brother, (his name I knew,)
      The first of all his cote,
    A shepheard true, yet not so true
      As he that erst I hote.
    Whilome all these were low and lief,
      And loved their flocks to feed;
    They never stroven to be chief,
      And simple was their weed:
    But now (thanked be God therefore!)
      The world is well amend,
    Their weeds be not so nighly wore;
      Such simplesse might them shend!
    They be yclad in purple and pall,
      So hath their God them blist;
    They reign and rulen over all,
      And lord it as they list;
    Ygirt with belts of glittering gold,
      (Might they good shepheards been!)
    Their Pan their sheep to them has sold,
      I say as some have seen.
    For Palinode (if thou him ken)
      Yode late on pilgrimage
    To Rome, (if such be Rome,) and then
      He saw thilk misusage;
    For shepheards (said he) there doen lead,
      As lords done other where;
    Their sheep have crusts, and they the bread;
      The chips, and they the cheer:
    They have the fleece, and eke the flesh,
      (O seely sheep the while!)
    The corn is theirs, let others thresh,
      Their hands they may not file.
    They have great store and thrifty stocks,
      Great friends and feeble foes;
    What need them caren for their flocks,
      Their boys can look to those.
    These wisards welter in wealth's waves,
      Pamper'd in pleasures deep;
    They have fat kerns, and leany knaves,
      Their fasting flocks to keep.
    Sike mister men be all misgone,
      They heapen hills of wrath;
    Such surly shepheards have we none,
      They keepen all the path.
    MOR. Here is a great deal of good matter
      Lost for lack of telling;
    Now sicker I see thou dost but clatter,
      Harm may come of melling.
    Thou meddlest more than shall have thank,
      To witen shepheards' wealth;
    When folk be fat, and riches rank,
      It is a sign of health.
    But say me, what is Algrind, he
      That is so oft benempt?
    THOM. He is a shepheard great in gree,
      But hath been long ypent:
    One day he sat upon a hill,
      As now thou wouldest me;
    But I am taught, by Algrind's ill,
      To love the low degree;
    For sitting so with bared scalp,
      An eagle[13] soared high,
    That, weening his white head was chalk,
      A shell-fish down let fly;
    She ween'd the shell-fish to have broke,
      But therewith bruis'd his brain;
    So now, astonied with the stroke,
      He lies in lingering pain.
    MOR. Ah! good Algrind! his hap was ill,
      But shall be better in time.
    Now farewell, shepheard, sith this hill
      Thou hast such doubt to climb.


    PALINODE'S EMBLEME.

    _In medio virtus._
    (Virtue dwells in the middle place.)


    MORRELL'S EMBLEME.

    _In summo felicitas._
    (Happiness in the highest.)




    [Illustration: AUGUST
    AEGLOGA
    OCTAVA

    EMBLEMES]




AUGUST. ÆGLOGA OCTAVA. ARGUMENT.

In this Æglogue is set forth a delectable controversy, made in imitation
of that in Theocritus: whereto also Virgil fashioned his third and
seventh Æglogue. They chose for umpire of their strife, Cuddy, a
neat-herd's boy; who, having ended their cause, reciteth also himself a
proper song, whereof Colin he saith was author.


    WILLIE. PERIGOT. CUDDIE.

    WILLIE.
    Tell me, Perigot, what shall be the game,
      Wherefore with mine thou dare thy music match?
    Or be thy bagpipes run far out of frame?
      Or hath the cramp thy joints benumb'd with ache?
    PER. Ah! Willie, when the heart is ill assay'd,
    How can bagpipe or joints be well apaid?
    WIL. What the foul evil hath thee so bestad?
      Whilome thou was peregall to the best,
    And wont to make the jolly shepheards glad,
      With piping and dancing didst pass the rest.
    PER. Ah! Willie, now I have learn'd a new dance;
    My old music marr'd by a new mischance.
    WIL. Mischief might to that mischance befall,
      That so hath reft us of our merriment;
    But rede me what pain doth thee so appal;
      Or lovest thou, or be thy younglings miswent?
    PER. Love hath misled both my younglings and me;
    I pine for pain, and they my pain to see.
    WIL. Perdie, and wellaway! ill may they thrive;
      Never knew I lover's sheep in good plight:
    But and if in rhymes with me thou dare strive,
      Such fond fantasies shall soon be put to flight.
    PER. That shall I do, though mochell worse I fared:
    Never shall be said that Perigot was dared.
    WIL. Then lo, Perigot, the pledge which I plight,
      A mazer ywrought of the maple warre,
    Wherein is enchased many a fair sight
      Of bears and tigers, that maken fierce war;
    And over them spread a goodly wild vine,
    Entrailed with a wanton ivy twine.
    Thereby is a lamb in the wolvës jaws;
      But see, how fast runneth the shepheard swain
    To save the innocent from the beast's paws,
      And here with his sheephook hath him slain.
    Tell me, such a cup hast thou ever seen?
    Well might it beseem any harvest queen.
    PER. Thereto will I pawn yonder spotted lamb;
      Of all my flock there n'is such another,
    For I brought him up without the dam;
      But Colin Clout reft me of his brother,
    That he purchas'd of me in the plain field;
    Sore against my will was I forc'd to yield.
    WIL. Sicker, make like account of his brother;
      But who shall judge the wager won or lost?
    PER. That shall yonder herdgroom and none other,
     Which over the pease hitherward doth post.
    WIL. But, for the sunbeam so sore doth us beat,
    Were not better to shun the scorching heat?
    PER. Well agreed, Willie; then set thee down, swain;
      Such a song never heardest thou but Colin sing.
    CUD. 'Gin, when ye list, ye jolly shepheards twain;
      Such a judge, as Cuddie, were for a king.
    PER. It fell upon a holy eve,
    WIL. Hey, ho, holiday!
    PER. When holy Fathers wont to shrieve;
    WIL. Now ginneth this roundelay.
    PER. Sitting upon a hill so high,
    WIL. Hey, ho, the high hill!
    PER. The while my flock did feed thereby;
    WIL. The while the shepheard self did spill;
    PER. I saw the bouncing Bellibone,
    WIL.   Hey, ho, Bonnibell!
    PER. Tripping over the dale alone;
    WIL.   She can trip it very well.
    PER. Well decked in a frock of gray,
    WIL.   Hey, ho, gray is greet!
    PER. And in a kirtle of green saye,
    WIL.   The green is for maidens meet.
    PER. A chapelet on her head she wore,
    WIL.   Hey, ho, chapelet!
    PER. Of sweet violets therein was store,
    WIL.   She sweeter than the violet.
    PER. My sheep did leave their wonted food,
    WIL.   Hey, ho, seely sheep!
    PER. And gaz'd on her as they were wood,
    WIL.   Wood as he that did them keep.
    PER. As the bonilass passed by,
    WIL.   Hey, ho, bonilass!
    PER. She rov'd at me with glancing eye,
    WIL.   As clear as the crystal glass:
    PER. All as the sunny beam so bright,
    WIL.   Hey, ho, the sun-beam!
    PER. Glanceth from Phœbus' face forthright,
    WIL.   So love into thy heart did stream:
    PER. Or as the thunder cleaves the clouds,
    WIL.   Hey, ho, the thunder!
    PER. Wherein the lightsome levin shrouds,
    WIL.   So cleaves thy soul asunder:
    PER. Or as Dame Cynthia's silver ray,
    WIL.   Hey, ho, the moonlight!
    PER. Upon the glittering wave doth play,
    WIL.   Such play is a piteous plight.
    PER. The glance into my heart did glide,
    WIL.   Hey, ho, the glider!
    PER. Therewith my soul was sharply gryde,
    WIL.   Such wounds soon waxen wider.
    PER. Hasting to wrench the arrow out,
    WIL.   Hey, ho, Perigot!
    PER. I left the head in my heart-root,
    WIL.   It was a desperate shot.
    PER. There it rankleth aye more and more,
    WIL.   Hey, ho, the arrow!
    PER. Ne can I find salve for my sore,
    WIL.   Love is a careless sorrow.
    PER. And though my bale with death I bought,
    WIL.   Hey, ho, heavy cheer!
    PER. Yet should thilk lass not from my thought,
    WIL.   So you may buy gold too dear.
    PER. But whether in painful love I pine,
    WIL.   Hey, ho, pinching pain!
    PER. Or thrive in wealth, she shall be mine,
    WIL.   But if thou can her obtain.
    PER. And if for graceless grief I die,
    WIL.   Hey, ho, graceless grief!
    PER. Witness she slew me with her eye,
    WIL.   Let thy folly be the prief.
    PER. And you, that saw it, simple sheep,
    WIL.   Hey, ho, the fair flock!
    PER. For prief thereof, my death shall weep,
    WIL.   And moan with many a mock.
    PER. So learn'd I love on a holy eve,
    WIL.   Hey, ho, holy-day!
    PER. That ever since my heart did grieve,
    WIL.   Now endeth our roundelay."
    CUD. Sicker, such a roundel never heard I none;
      Little lacketh Perigot of the best,
    And Willie is not greatly overgone,
      So weren his under-songs well addrest.
    WIL. Herdgroom, I fear me thou have a squint eye;
    Arede uprightly, who has the victory.
    CUD. Faith of my soul, I deem each have gained;
      Forthy let the lamb be Willie his own;
    And for Perigot, so well hath him pained,
      To him be the wroughten mazer alone.
    PER. Perigot is well pleased with the doom,
    Ne can Willie wite the witeless herdgroom.
    WIL. Never dempt more right of beauty, I ween,
    The shepheard of Ida that judged Beauty's queen.
    CUD. But tell me, shepheards, should it not yshend
      Your roundels fresh, to hear a doleful verse
    Of Rosalind (who knows not Rosalind?)
      That Colin made? ilk can I you rehearse.
    PER. Now say it, Cuddie, as thou art a lad;
      With merry thing it's good to medle sad.
    WIL. Faith of my soul, thou shalt ycrowned be
      In Colin's stead, if thou this song arede;
    For never thing on earth so pleaseth me
      As him to hear, or matter of his deed.
    CUD. Then listen each unto my heavy lay,
    And tune your pipes as ruthful as ye may.

    "Ye wasteful Woods! bear witness of my woe,
    Wherein my plaints did oftentimes resound;
    Ye careless Birds are privy to my cries,
    Which in your songs were wont to make a part:
    Thou, pleasant Spring, hast lull'd me oft asleep,
    Whose streams my trickling tears did oft augment!

    "Resort of people doth my griefs augment,
    The walled towns do work my greater woe;
    The forest wide is fitter to resound
    The hollow echo of my careful cries.
    I hate the house, since thence my love did part,
    Whose wailful want debars mine eyes of sleep.

    "Let streams of tears supply the place of sleep;
    Let all, that sweet is, void; and all, that may augment
    My dole, draw near! More meet to wail my woe
    Be the wild woods, my sorrows to resound,
    Than bed, nor bower, both which I fill with cries,
    When I them see so waste, and find no part

    "Of pleasure past. Here will I dwell apart
    In gastful grove therefore, till my last sleep
    Do close mine eyes; so shall I not augment
    With sight of such as change my restless woe.
    Help me, ye baneful Birds! whose shrieking sound
    Is sign of dreary death, my deadly cries

    "Most ruthfully to tune: and as my cries
    (Which of my woe cannot bewray least part)
    You hear all night, when Nature craveth sleep,
    Increase, so let your irksome yells augment.
    Thus all the nights in plaints, the day in woe,
    I vowed have to waste, till safe and sound

    "She home return, whose voice's silver sound
    To cheerful songs can change my cheerless cries.
    Hence with the nightingale will I take part,
    That blessed bird, that spends her time of sleep
    In songs and plaintive pleas, the more t' augment
    The memory of his misdeed that bred her woe.

    "And you that feel no woe, when as the sound
    Of these my nightly cries ye hear apart,
    Let break your sounder sleep, and pity augment."

    PER. O Colin, Colin! the shepheards' joy,
      How I admire each turning of thy verse;
    And Cuddie, fresh Cuddie, the liefest boy,
      How dolefully his dole thou didst rehearse!
    CUD. Then blow your pipes, shepheards, till you be at home;
    The night hieth fast, it's time to be gone.


    PERIGOT HIS EMBLEME.[14]

    _Vincenti gloria victi._
    (To the conqueror belongs the glory of the conquered.)


    WILLIE'S EMBLEME.[14]
    _Vinto non vitto._
    (Conquered, not overcome.)


    CUDDIE'S EMBLEME.[14]
    _Felice chi puo_.
    (He is happy who can.)




    [Illustration: SEPTEMBER
    AEGLOGA
    NONA

    DIGGON'S
    EMBLEME]




SEPTEMBER. ÆGLOGA NONA. ARGUMENT.

Herein Diggon Davie is devised to be a shepheard that, in hope of more
gain, drove his sheep into a far country. The abuses whereof, and loose
living of Popish prelates, by occasion of Hobbinol's demand, he
discourseth at large.


    HOBBINOL. DIGGON DAVIE.

    HOBBINOL.
    Diggon Davie! I bid her good-day;
    Or Diggon her is, or I missay.
    DIG. Her was her, while it was day-light,
    But now her is a most wretched wight:
    For day, that was, is wightly past,
    And now at erst the dark night doth hast.
    HOB. Diggon, arede who has thee so dight;
    Never I wist thee in so poor a plight.
    Where is the fair flock thou wast wont to lead?
    Or be they chaffred, or at mischief dead?
    DIG. Ah! for love of that is to thee most lief,
    Hobbinol, I pray thee gall not my old grief;
    Such question rippeth up cause of new woe,
    For one, opened, might unfold many moe.
    HOB. Nay, but sorrow close shrouded in heart,
    I know, to keep is a burdenous smart:
    Each thing imparted is more eath to bear:
    When the rain is fallen, the clouds waxen clear.
    And now, sithence I saw thy head last,
    Thrice three moons be fully spent and past;
    Since when thou hast measured much ground,
    And wandered well about the world round,
    So as thou can many things relate;
    But tell me first of thy flock's estate.
    DIG. My sheep be wasted; (woe is me therefore!)
    The jolly shepheard that was of yore,
    Is now nor jolly, nor shepheard more.
    In foreign coasts men said was plenty;
    And so there is, but all of misery:
    I deem'd there much to have eked my store,
    But such eking hath made my heart sore.
    In those countries, whereas I have been,
    No being for those that truly mean;
    But for such, as of guile maken gain,
    No such country as there to remain;
    They setten to sale their shops of shame,
    And maken a mart of their good name:
    The shepheards there robben one another,
    And layen baits to beguile their brother;
    Or they will buy his sheep out of the cote,
    Or they will carven the shepheard's throat.
    The shepheard's swain you cannot well ken,
    But it be by his pride, from other men;
    They looken big as bulls that be bate,
    And bearen the crag so stiff and so state,
    As cock on his dunghill crowing crank.
    HOB. Diggon, I am so stiff and so stank,
    that uneath may I stand any more;
    And now the western wind bloweth sore,
    That now is in his chief sovereignty,
    Beating the withered leaf from the tree;
    Sit we down here under the hill;
    Then may we talk and tellen our fill,
    And make a mock at the blustering blast:
    Now say on, Diggon, whatever thou hast.
    DIG. Hobbin, ah Hobbin! I curse the stound
    That ever I cast to have lorn this ground:
    Well-away the while I was so fond
    To leave the good, that I had in hond,
    In hope of better that was uncouth,
    So lost the dog the flesh in his mouth.
    My silly sheep (ah! silly sheep!)
    That here by there I whilome us'd to keep,
    All were they lusty as thou didest see,
    Be all starved with pine and penury;
    Hardly myself escaped thilk pain,
    Driven for need to come home again.
    HOB. Ah! fon, now by thy loss art taught
    That seldom change the better brought:
    Content who lives with tried state,
    Need fear no change of frowning Fate;
    But who will seek for unknown gain,
    Oft lives by loss, and leaves with pain.
    DIG. I wot ne, Hobbin, how I was bewitch'd
    With vain desire and hope to be enrich'd:
    But, sicker, so it is, as the bright star
    Seemeth aye greater when it is far:
    I thought the soil would have made me rich,
    But now I wot it is nothing sich;
    For either the shepheards be idle and still,
    And led of their sheep what way they will,
    Or they be false, and full of covetise,
    And casten to compass many wrong emprise:
    But the more be fraught with fraud and spite,
    Ne in good nor goodness taken delight,
    But kindle coals of contest and ire,
    Wherewith they set all the world on fire;
    Which when they thinken again to quench,
    With holy water they do them all drench.
    They say they con to heaven the highway,
    But by my soul I dare undersay
    They never set foot in that same troad,
    But balk the right way, and strayen abroad.
    They boast they have the devil at command,
    But ask them therefore what they have pawn'd:
    Marry! that great Pan bought with dear borrow,
    To quit it from the black bower of sorrow.
    But they have sold thilk same long ago,
    For they woulden draw with them many moe.
    But let them gang alone a God's name;
    As they have brewed, so let them bear blame.
    HOB. Diggon, I pray thee speak not so dirk;
    Such mister saying me seemeth to mirk.
    DIG. Then, plainly to speak of shepheards' most what,
    Bad is the best; (this English is flat)
    Their ill haviour gars men missay
    Both of their doctrine, and their fay.
    They sayn the world is much war than it wont,
    All for her shepheards be beastly and blont.
    Other sayn, but how truly I n'ote,
    All for they holden shame of their cote:
    Some stick not to say, (hot coal on their tongue!)
    That such mischief graseth them among,
    All for they casten too much of world's care,
    To deck their dame, and enrich their heir;
    For such encheason, if you go nigh,
    Few chimneys reeking you shall espy.
    The fat ox, that wont lig in the stall,
    Is now fast stalled in their crumenall.
    Thus chatten the people in their steads,
    Alike as a monster of many heads:
    But they, that shooten nearest the prick,
    Sayn, other the fat from their beards doen lick:
    For big bulls of Bashan brace them about,
    That with their horns butten the more stout;
    But the lean souls treaden under foot,
    And to seek redress might little boot;
    For liker be they to pluck away more,
    Than ought of the gotten good to restore:
    For they be like foul quagmires overgrass'd,
    That, if thy galage once sticketh fast,
    The more to wind it out thou dost swink,
    Thou must aye deeper and deeper sink.
    Yet better leave off with a little loss,
    Than by much wrestling to lose the gross.
    HOB. Now, Diggon, I see thou speakest too plain;
    Better it were a little to feign,
    And cleanly cover that cannot be cured;
    Such ill, as is forced, must needs be endured.
    But of such pastors how do the flocks creep?
    DIG. Such as the shepheards, such be their sheep,
    For they nill listen to the shepheard's voice;
    But if he call them, at their good choice
    They wander at will and stay at pleasure,
    And to their folds yede at their own leisure.
    But they had be better come at their call;
    For many have unto mischief fall,
    And been of ravenous wolves yrent,
    All for they nould be buxom and bent.
    HOB. Fie on thee, Diggon, and all thy foul leasing;
    Well is known that, sith the Saxon king,[15]
    Never was wolf seen, many nor some,
    Nor in all Kent, nor in Christendom;
    But the fewer wolves (the sooth to sayn)
    The more be the foxes that here remain.
    DIG. Yes, but they gang in more secret wise,
    And with sheeps' clothing doen them disguise.
    They walk not widely as they were wont,
    For fear of rangers and the great hunt,
    But privily prowling to and fro,
    Enaunter they might be inly know.
    HOB. Or privy or pert if any bin,
    We have great bandogs will tear their skin.
    DIG. Indeed thy Ball is a bold big cur,
    And could make a jolly hole in their fur:
    But not good dogs them needeth to chase,
    But heedy shepheards to discern their face;
    For all their craft is in their countenance,
    They be so grave and full of maintenance.
    But shall I tell thee what myself know
    Chanced to Roffin not long ago?
    HOB. Say it out, Diggon, whatever it hight,
    For not but well might him betight:
    He is so meek, wise, and merciable,
    And with his word his work is convenable.
    Colin Clout, I ween, be his self boy,
    (Ah, for Colin! he whilome my joy:)
    Shepheards such, God might us many send,
    That doen so carefully their flocks tend.
    DIG. Thilk same shepheard might I well mark,
    He has a dog to bite or to bark;
    Never had shepheard so keen a cur,
    That waketh and if but a leaf stur.
    Whilome there wonned a wicked wolf,
    That with many a lamb had gutted his gulf,
    And ever at night wont to repair
    Unto the flock, when the welkin shone fair,
    Yclad in clothing of silly sheep,
    When the good old man used to sleep;
    Then at midnight he would bark and bawl,
    (For he had eft learned a currës call,)
    As if a wolf were among the sheep:
    With that the shepheard would break his sleep,
    And send out Lowder (for so his dog hote)
    To range the fields with wide open throat.
    Then, when as Lowder was far away,
    This wolvish sheep would catchen his prey,
    A lamb, or a kid, or a weanel wast;
    With that to the wood would he speed him fast.
    Long time he used this slippery prank,
    Ere Roffy could for his labour him thank.
    At end, the shepheard his practice spied,
    (For Roffy is wise, and as Argus eyed,)
    And, when at even he came to the flock,
    Fast in their folds he did them lock,
    And took out the wolf in his counterfeit coat,
    And let out the sheep's blood at his throat.
    HOB. Marry, Diggon, what should him affray
    To take his own where ever it lay?
    For, had his weasand been a little widder,
    He would have devoured both hidder and shidder.
    DIG. Mischief light on him, and God's great curse,
    Too good for him had been a great deal worse;
    For it was a perilous beast above all,
    And eke had he cond the shepheard's call,
    And oft in the night came to the sheep-cote,
    And called Lowder, with a hollow throat,
    As if the old man self had been:
    The dog his master's voice did it ween,
    Yet half in doubt he opened the door,
    And ran out as he was wont of yore.
    No sooner was out, but, swifter than thought,
    Fast by the hide the wolf Lowder caught;
    And, had not Roffy run to the steven,
    Lowder had been slain thilk same even.
    HOB. God shield, man, he should so ill have thrive,
    All for he did his devoir belive.
    If such be wolves, as thou hast told,
    How might we, Diggon, them behold?
    DIG. How, but, with heed and watchfulness,
    Forstallen them of their wiliness:
    Forthy with shepheard sits not play,
    Or sleep, as some doen, all the long day;
    But ever liggen in watch and ward,
    From sudden force their flocks for to guard.
    HOB. Ah! Diggon, thilk same rule were too strait,
    All the cold season to watch and wait:
    We be of flesh, men as other be,
    Why should we be bound to such misery?
    Whatever thing lacketh changeable rest,
    Must needs decay, when it is at best.
    DIG. Ah! but, Hobbinol, all this long tale
    Nought easeth the care that doth me forhaile;
    What shall I do? what way shall I wend,
    My piteous plight and loss to amend?
    Ah! good Hobbinol, might I thee pray
    Of aid or counsel in my decay?
    HOB. Now by my soul, Diggon, I lament
    The hapless mischief that has thee hent;
    Natheless thou seest my lowly sail,
    That froward Fortune doth ever availe:
    But, were Hobbinol as God might please,
    Diggon should soon find favour and ease:
    But if to my cottage thou wilt resort,
    So as I can I will thee comfort;
    There mayst thou lig in a vetchy bed,
    Till fairer Fortune shew forth his head.
    DIG. Ah! Hobbinol, God may it thee requite;
    Diggon on few such friends did ever light.


    DIGGON'S EMBLEME.
    _Inopem me copia fecit._
    (Plenty has made me poor.)




    [Illustration: OCTOBER
    AEGLOGA
    DECIMA

    CUDDIE'S
    EMBLEME]




OCTOBER. ÆGLOGA DECIMA. ARGUMENT.

In Cuddie is set out the perfect pattern of a Poet, which, finding no
maintenance of his state and studies, complaineth of the contempt of
Poetry, and the causes thereof: specially having been in all ages, and
even amongst the most barbarous, always of singular account and honour,
and being indeed so worthy and commendable an art; or rather no art, but
a divine gift and heavenly instinct not to be gotten by labour and
learning, but adorned with both; and poured into the wit by a certain
Enthousiasmos and celestial inspiration, as the Author hereof elsewhere
at large discourseth in his book called _The English Poet_, which book
being lately come to my hands, I mind also by God's grace, upon further
advisement, to publish.


    PIERS. CUDDIE.

    PIERS.
    Cuddie, for shame, hold up thy heavy head,
    And let us cast with what delight to chase
    And weary this long ling'ring Phœbus' race.
    Whilome thou wont the shepheards' lads to lead
    In rhymes, in riddles, and in bidding base;
    Now they in thee, and thou in sleep, art dead.

    CUD. Piers, I have piped erst so long with pain,
    That all mine oaten reeds be rent and wore,
    And my poor Muse hath spent her spared store,
    Yet little good hath got, and much less gain.
    Such pleasance makes the grasshopper so poor,
    And lig so laid, when winter doth her strain.

    The dapper ditties, that I wont devise,
    To feed youth's fancy, and the flocking fry,
    Delighten much; what I the bett forthy?
    They have the pleasure, I a slender prise:
    I beat the bush, the birds to them do fly:
    What good thereof to Cuddie can arise?

    PIERS. Cuddie, the praise is better than the price,
    The glory eke much greater than the gain:
    O what an honour is it, to restrain
    The lust of lawless youth with good advice,
    Or prick them forth with pleasance of thy vein,
    Whereto thou list their trained wills entice!

    Soon as thou 'ginn'st to set thy notes in frame,
    O how the rural routs to thee do cleave!
    Seemeth thou dost their soul of sense bereave,
    All as the shepheard that did fetch his dame
    From Pluto's baleful bower withouten leave;
    His music's might the hellish hound did tame.

    CUD. So praisen babes the peacock's spotted train,
    And wondren at bright Argus' blazing eye;
    But who rewards him e'er the more forthy,
    Or feeds him once the fuller by a grain?
    Such praise is smoke, that sheddeth in the sky;
    Such words be wind, and wasten soon in vain.

    PIERS. Abandon then the base and viler clown;
    Lift up thyself out of the lowly dust,
    And sing of bloody Mars, of wars, of giusts;
    Turn thee to those that wield the awful crown,
    To doubted knights, whose woundless armour rusts,
    And helms unbruised waxen daily brown.

    There may thy Muse display her flutt'ring wing,
    And stretch herself at large from east to west;
    Whither thou list in fair Elisa[16] rest,
    Or, if thee please in bigger notes to sing,
    Advance the Worthy whom she loveth best,
    That first the White Bear to the stake did bring.

    And, when the stubborn stroke of stronger stounds
    Has somewhat slack'd the tenor of thy string,
    Of love and lustihead then mayst thou sing,
    And carol loud, and lead the Miller's round,
    All were Elisa one of thilk same ring;
    So might our Cuddie's name to heaven sound.

    CUD. Indeed the Romish Tityrus, I hear,
    Through his Mecænas left his oaten reed,
    Whereon he erst had taught his flocks to feed,
    And laboured lands to yield the timely ear,
    And eft did sing of wars and deadly dreed
    So as the heavens did quake his verse to hear.

    But ah! Mecænas is yclad in clay,
    And great Augustus long ago is dead,
    And all the worthies liggen wrapt in lead,
    That matter made for poets on to play:
    For ever, who in derring-do were dread,
    The lofty verse of them was loved aye.

    But after Virtue gan for age to stoop,
    And mighty Manhood brought a bed of ease,
    The vaunting poets found nought worth a pease
    To put in press among the learned troop;
    Then gan the streams of flowing wits to cease,
    And sunbright honour penn'd in shameful coop.

    And if that any buds of Poesy,
    Yet of the old stock, gan to shoot again,
    Or it men's follies must to-force to feign,
    And roll with rest in rhymes of ribaudry;
    Or, as it sprung, it wither must again;
    Tom Piper makes us better melody.

    PIERS. O peerless Po'sy! where is then thy place?
    If nor in princes' palace thou dost sit,
    (And yet is princes' palace the most fit,)
    Ne breast of baser birth doth thee embrace,
    Then make thee wings of thine aspiring wit,
    And, whence thou cam'st, fly back to heaven apace.

    CUD. Ah! Percy, it is all-to weak and wan,
    So high to soar and make so large a flight;
    Her pieced pinions be not so in plight:
    For Colin fits such famous flight to scan;
    He, were he not with love so ill bedight,
    Would mount as high and sing as sweet as swan.

    PIERS. Ah! fon; for Love does teach him climb so high,
    And lifts him up out of the loathsome mire;
    Such immortal mirror, as he doth admire,
    Would raise one's mind above the starry sky,
    And cause a caitiff courage to aspire;
    For lofty love doth loathe a lowly eye.

    CUD. All otherwise the state of Poet stands;
    For lordly Love is such a tyrant fell,
    That, where he rules, all power he doth expel;
    The vaunted verse a vacant head demands,
    Ne wont with crabbed care the Muses dwell:
    Unwisely weaves, that takes two webs in hand.

    Who ever casts to compass weighty prize,
    And thinks to throw out thund'ring words of threat,
    Let pour in lavish cups and thrifty bits of meat,
    For Bacchus' fruit is friend to Phœbus wise;
    And, when with wine the brain begins to sweat,
    The numbers flow as fast as spring doth rise.

    Thou kenst not, Percie, how the rhyme should rage;
    O if my temples were distain'd with wine,
    And girt in garlands of wild ivy twine,
    How I could rear the Muse on stately stage,
    And teach her tread aloft in buskin fine,
    With quaint Bellona in her equipage!

    But ah! my courage cools ere it be warm:
    Forthy content us in this humble shade,
    Where no such troublous tides have us assay'd;
    Here we our slender pipes may safely charm.
    PIERS. And, when my goats shall have their bellies laid,
    Cuddie shall have a kid to store his farm.


    CUDDIE'S EMBLEME.[17]
    _Agitante calescimus illo, etc._




    [Illustration: NOVEMBER
    AEGLOGA
    UNDECIMA

    COLIN'S
    EMBLEME]




NOVEMBER. ÆGLOGA UNDECIMA. ARGUMENT.

In this xi. Æglogue he bewaileth the death of some maiden of great
blood, whom he calleth Dido. The personage is secret, and to me
altogether unknown, albeit of himself I often required the same. This
Æglogue is made in imitation of Marot his song, which he made upon the
death of Loyes the French Queen; but far passing his reach, and in mine
opinion all other the Æglogues of this Book.


    THENOT. COLIN.

    THENOT.
    Colin, my dear, when shall it please thee sing,
    As thou wert wont, songs of some jovisance?
    Thy Muse too long slumb'reth in sorrowing,
    Lulled asleep through Love's misgovernance.
    Now somewhat sing, whose endless sovenance
    Among the shepheards' swains may aye remain,
    Whether thee list thy loved lass advance,
    Or honour Pan with hymns of higher vein.
    COL. Thenot, now n'is the time of merrimake,
    Nor Pan to herie, nor with Love to play;
    Such mirth in May is meetest for to make,
    Or summer shade, under the cocked hay.
    But now sad winter welked hath the day,
    And Phœbus, weary of his yearly task,
    Ystabled hath his steeds in lowly lay,
    And taken up his inn in Fishes'[18] hask:
    Thilk sullen season sadder plight doth ask,
    And loatheth such delights as thou dost praise:
    The mournful Muse in mirth now list ne mask,
    As she was wont in youth and summer-days;
    But if thou algate lust light virelays,
    And looser songs of love to underfong,
    Who but thyself deserves such poets' praise?
    Relieve thy oaten pipes that sleepen long.
    THE. The nightingale is sovereign of song,
    Before him sits the titmouse silent be;
    And I, unfit to thrust in skilful throng,
    Should Colin make judge of my foolery.
    Nay, better learn of them that learned be,
    And have been watered at the Muses' well;
    The kindly dew drops from the higher tree,
    And wets the little plants that lowly dwell:
    But if sad winter's wrath, and season chill,
    Accord not with thy Muse's merriment,
    To sadder times thou mayst attune thy quill,
    And sing of sorrow and death's dreariment;
    For dead is Dido,[19] dead, alas! and drent,
    Dido! the great shepheard his daughter sheen:
    The fairest may she was that ever went,
    Her like she has not left behind, I ween:
    And, if thou wilt bewail my woful teen,
    I shall thee give yond cosset for thy pain;
    And, if thy rhymes as round and rueful been
    As those that did thy Rosalind complain,
    Much greater gifts for guerdon thou shalt gain.
    Than kid or cosset, which I thee benempt:
    Then up, I say, thou jolly shepheard swain,
    Let not my small demand be so contempt.
    COL. Thenot, to that I chose thou dost me tempt;
    But ah! too well I wot my humble vein,
    And how my rhymes be rugged and unkempt;
    Yet, as I con, my conning I will strain.

    "Up, then, Melpomene! the mournful'st Muse of Nine,
    Such cause of mourning never hadst afore;
    Up, grisly ghosts! and up my rueful rhyme!
    Matter of mirth now shalt thou have no more;
    For dead she is, that mirth thee made of yore.
     Dido, my dear, alas! is dead,
      Dead, and lieth wrapt in lead.
         O heavy herse!
    Let streaming tears be poured out in store;
        O careful verse!

    "Shepheards, that by your flocks of Kentish downs abide,
    Wail ye this woful waste of Nature's wark;
    Wail we the wight, whose presence was our pride;
    Wail we the wight, whose absence is our cark;
    The sun of all the world is dim and dark;
      The earth now lacks her wonted light,
      And all we dwell in deadly night.
        O heavy herse!
    Break we our pipes, that shrill'd as loud as lark;
        O careful verse!

    "Why do we longer live, (ah! why live we so long?)
    Whose better days Death hath shut up in woe?
    The fairest flower our garland all among
    Is faded quite, and into dust ygo.
    Sing now, ye shepheards' daughters, sing no moe
      The songs that Colin made you in her praise,
      But into weeping turn your wanton lays.
        O heavy herse!
    Now is time to die: nay, time was long ago:
        O careful verse!

    "Whence is it, that the flowret of the field doth fade,
    And lieth buried long in Winter's bale;
    Yet, soon as Spring his mantle hath display'd,
    It flow'reth fresh, as it should never fail?
    But thing on earth that is of most avail,
      As virtue's branch and beauty's bud,
      Reliven not for any good.
        O heavy herse!
    The branch once dead, the bud eke needs must quail;
        O careful verse!

    "She, while she was, (that was, a woful word to sayn!)
    For beauty's praise and pleasance had no peer;
    So well she couth the shepheards entertain
    With cakes and cracknels, and such country cheer:
    Ne would she scorn the simple shepheard's swain;
      For she would call him often heme,
      And give him curds and clouted cream.
        O heavy herse!
    Als Colin Clout she would not once disdain;
        O careful verse!

    "But now such happy cheer is turn'd to heavy chance,
    Such pleasance now displac'd by dolor's dint;
    All music sleeps, where Death doth lead the dance,
    And shepheards' wonted solace is extinct.
    The blue in black, the green in gray, is tinct;
      The gaudy garlands deck her grave,
      The faded flowers her corse embrave.
        O heavy herse!
    Mourn now, my Muse, now mourn with tears besprint;
        O careful verse!

    "O thou great shepheard, Lobbin, how great is thy grief?
    Where be the nosegays that she dight for thee?
    The coloured chaplets wrought with a chief,[20]
    The knotted rush-rings, and gilt rosemary?
    For she deemed nothing too dear for thee.
      Ah! they be all yclad in clay;
      One bitter blast blew all away.
        O heavy herse!
    Thereof nought remains but the memory;
        O careful verse!

    "Ah me! that dreary death should strike so mortal stroke,
    That can undo Dame Nature's kindly course;
    The faded locks fall from the lofty oak,
    The floods do gasp, for dried is their source,
    And floods of tears flow in their stead perforce:
      The mantled meadows mourn,
      Their sundry colours turn.
        O heavy herse!
    The heavens do melt in tears without remorse;
        O careful verse!

    "The feeble flocks in field refuse their former food,
    And hang their heads as they would learn to weep;
    The beasts in forest wail as they were wood,
    Except the wolves, that chase the wand'ring sheep,
    Now she is gone that safely did them keep:
      The turtle on the bared branch
      Laments the wound that Death did launch.
        O heavy herse!
    And Philomele her song with tears doth steep;
        O careful verse!

    "The water nymphs, that wont with her to sing and dance,
    And for her garland olive branches bear,
    Now baleful boughs of cypress do advance;
    The Muses, that were wont green bays to wear,
    Now bringen bitter elder branches sere;
      The Fatal Sisters eke repent
      Her vital thread so soon was spent.
        O heavy herse!
    Mourn now, my Muse, now mourn with heavy cheer;
        O careful verse!

    "O trustless state of earthly things, and slipper hope
    Of mortal men, that swink and sweat for nought,
    And, shooting wide, doth miss the marked scope;
    Now have I learn'd (a lesson dearly bought)
    That n'is on earth assurance to be sought;
      For what might be in earthly mould,
      That did her buried body hold?
        O heavy herse!
    Yet saw I on the bier when it was brought;
        O careful verse!

    "But maugre Death, and dreaded Sisters' deadly spite,
    And gates of hell, and fiery Furies' force,
    She hath the bonds broke of eternal night,
    Her soul unbodied of the burdenous corse.
    Why then weeps Lobbin so without remorse?
      O Lobb! thy loss no longer lament;
      Dido is dead, but into heaven hent.
        O happy herse!
    Cease now, my Muse, now cease thy sorrows' source,
        O joyful verse!

    "Why wail we then? why weary we the gods with plaints,
    As if some evil were to her betight?
    She reigns a goddess now among the saints,
    That whilome was the saint of shepheards light,
    And is installed now in heavens' height,
      I see thee, blessed soul! I see
      Walk in Elysian fields so free.
        O happy herse!
    Might I once come to thee, (O that I might!)
        O joyful verse!

    "Unwise and wretched men, to weet what's good or ill,
    We deem of death as doom of ill desert;
    But knew we, fools, what it us brings until,
    Die would we daily, once it to expert!
    No danger there the shepheard can assert;
       air fields and pleasant lays there bene;
      The fields aye fresh, the grass aye green.
        O happy herse!
    Make haste, ye shepheards, thither to revert.
        O joyful verse!

    "Dido is gone afore; (whose turn shall be the next?)
    There lives she with the blessed gods in bliss,
    There drinks she nectar with ambrosia mixt,
    And joys enjoys that mortal men do miss.
    The honour now of highest gods she is,
      That whilome was poor shepheards' pride,
      While here on earth she did abide.
        O happy herse!
    Cease now, my song, my woe now wasted is;
        O joyful verse!"

    THE. Ay, frank shepheard, how be thy verses meint
    With doleful pleasance, so as I ne wot
    Whether rejoice or weep for great constraint!
    Thine be the cosset, well hast thou it got.
    Up, Colin, up, enough thou mourned hast;
    Now 'gins to mizzle, his we homeward fast.


    COLIN'S EMBLEME.
    _La mort ny mord._
    (Death has lost its sting.)




    [Illustration: DECEMBER
    AEGLOGA
    DUODECIMA

    COLIN'S
    EMBLEME]




DECEMBER. ÆGLOGA DUODECIMA.[21] ARGUMENT.

This Æglogue (even as the first began) is ended with a complaint of
Colin to god Pan; wherein, as weary of his former ways, he proportioned
his life to the four seasons of the year; comparing his youth to the
spring time, when he was fresh and free from love's folly. His manhood
to the summer, which, he saith, was consumed with great heat and
excessive drouth, caused through a comet or blazing star, by which he
meaneth love; which passion is commonly compared to such flames and
immoderate heat. His ripest years he resembleth to an unseasonable
harvest, wherein the fruits fall ere they be ripe. His latter age to
winter's chill and frosty season, now drawing near to his last end.


    The gentle shepheard sat beside a spring,
    All in the shadow of a bushy brere,
    That Colin hight, which well could pipe and sing,
    For he of Tityrus his song did lere:
      There, as he sat in secret shade alone,
      Thus gan he make of love his piteous moan.

    "O sovereign Pan! thou god of shepheards all,
    Which of our tender lambkins takest keep,
    And, when our flocks into mischance might fall,
    Dost save from mischief the unwary sheep,
      Als of their masters hast no less regard
      Than of the flocks, which thou dost watch and ward;

    "I thee beseech (so be thou deign to hear
    Rude ditties, tun'd to shepheard's oaten reed,
    Or if I ever sonnet sung so clear,
    As it with pleasance might thy fancy feed,)
      Hearken a while, from thy green cabinet,
      The rural song of careful Colinet.

    "Whilome in youth, when flower'd my joyful spring,
    Like swallow swift I wander'd here and there;
    For heat of heedless lust me so did sting,
    That I of doubted danger had no fear:
      I went the wasteful woods and forest wide,
      Withouten dread of wolves to be espied.

    "I wont to range amid the mazy thicket,
    And gather nuts to make my Christmas-game,
    And joyed oft to chase the trembling pricket,
    Or hunt the heartless hare till she were tame.
      What recked I of wintry age's waste?--
      Then deemed I my spring would ever last.

    "How often have I scaled the craggy oak,
    All to dislodge the raven of her nest?
    How have I wearied, with many a stroke,
    The stately walnut-tree, the while the rest
      Under the tree fell all for nuts at strife?
      For like to me was liberty and life.

    "And for I was in thilk same looser years,
    (Whether the Muse so wrought me from my birth,
    Or I too much believ'd my shepheard peers,)
    Somedele ybent to song and music's mirth,
      A good old shepheard, Wrenock was his name,
      Made me by art more cunning in the same.

    "Fro thence I durst in derring to compare
    With shepheard's swain whatever fed in field;
    And, if that Hobbinol right judgment bare,
    To Pan his own self pipe I need not yield:
      For, if the flocking nymphs did follow Pan,
      The wiser Muses after Colin ran.

    "But, ah! such pride at length was ill repaid;
    The shepheard's god (perdie, god was he none)
    My hurtless pleasance did me ill upbraid,
    My freedom lorn, my life he left to moan.
      Love they him called that gave me check-mate,
      But better might they have behote him Hate.

    "Then gan my lovely spring bid me farewell,
    And summer season sped him to display
    (For Love then in the Lion's house did dwell,)
    The raging fire that kindled at his ray.
      A comet stirr'd up that unkindly heat,
      That reigned (as men said) in Venus' seat.

    "Forth was I led, not as I wont afore,
    When choice I had to choose my wand'ring way,
    But whether luck and love's unbridled lore
    Would lead me forth on Fancy's bit to play:
      The bush my bed, the bramble was my bower,
      The woods can witness many a woful stowre.

    "Where I was wont to seek the honey bee,
    Working her formal rooms in waxen frame,
    The grisly toadstool grown there might I see,
    And loathed paddocks lording on the same:
      And, where the chanting birds lull'd me asleep,
      The ghastly owl her grievous inn doth keep.

    "Then as the spring gives place to elder Time,
    And bringeth forth the fruit of summer's pride;
    All so my age, now passed youthly prime,
    To things of riper season self applied,
      And learn'd of lighter timber cotes to frame,
      Such as might save my sheep and me fro shame.

    "To make fine cages for the nightingale,
    And baskets of bulrushes, was my wont:
    Who to entrap the fish in winding sale
    Was better seen, or hurtful beasts to hont?
      I learned als the signs of heaven to ken,
      How Phœbus fails, where Venus sets, and when.

    "And tried time yet taught me greater things;
    The sudden rising of the raging seas,
    The sooth of birds by beating of their wings,
    The power of herbs, both which can hurt and ease,
      And which be wont t' enrage the restless sheep,
      And which be wont to work eternal sleep.

    "But, ah! unwise and witless Colin Clout,
    That kydst the hidden kinds of many a weed,
    Yet kydst not one to cure thy sore heart-root,
    Whose rankling wound as yet does rifely bleed.
      Why livest thou still, and yet hast thy death's wound?
      Why diest thou still, and yet alive art found?

    "Thus is my summer worn away and wasted,
    Thus is my harvest hastened all-to rathe;
    The ear that budded fair is burnt and blasted,
    And all my hoped gain is turn'd to scathe.
      Of all the seed, that in my youth was sown,
      Was none but brakes and brambles to be mown.

    "My boughs with blooms that crowned were at first,
    And promised of timely fruit such store,
    Are left both bare and barren now at erst;
    The flattering fruit is fallen to ground before,
      And rotted ere they were half mellow ripe;
      My harvest, waste, my hope away did wipe.

    "The fragrant flowers, that in my garden grew,
    Be withered, as they had been gathered long:
    Their roots be dried up for lack of dew,
    Yet dewed with tears they have been ever among.
      Ah! who has wrought my Rosalind this spite,
      To spoil the flowers that should her garland dight?

    "And I, that whilome wont to frame my pipe
    Unto the shifting of the shepheard's foot,
    Such follies now have gathered as too ripe,
    And cast them out as rotten and unsoote.
      The looser lass I cast to please no more;
      One if I please, enough is me therefore.

    "And thus of all my harvest-hope I have
    Nought reaped but a weedy crop of care;
    Which, when I thought have thresh'd in swelling sheave,
    Cockle for corn, and chaff for barley, bare:
      Soon as the chaff should in the fan be fin'd,
      All was blown away of the wavering wind.

    "So now my year draws to his latter term,
    My spring is spent, my summer burnt up quite;
    My harvest hastes to stir up Winter stern,
    And bids him claim with rigorous rage his right:
      So now he storms with many a sturdy stour;
      So now his blust'ring blast each coast doth scour.

    "The careful cold hath nipt my rugged rind,
    And in my face deep furrows eld hath pight:
    My head besprent with hoary frost I find,
    And by mine eye the crow his claw doth write:
      Delight is laid abed; and pleasure past;
      No sun now shines; clouds have all overcast.

    "Now leave, ye shepheards' boys, your merry glee;
    My Muse is hoarse and weary of this stound:
    Here will I hang my pipe upon this tree,
    Was never pipe of reed did better sound:
      Winter is come that blows the bitter blast,
      And after winter dreary death does hast.

    "Gather together, ye my little flock,
    My little flock, that was to me so lief;
    Let me, ah! let me in your folds ye lock,
    Ere the breme winter breed you greater grief.
      Winter is come, that blows the baleful breath,
      And after winter cometh timely death.

    "Adieu, delights, that lulled me asleep;
    Adieu, my dear, whose love I bought so dear;
    Adieu, my little lambs and loved sheep;
    Adieu, ye woods, that oft my witness were:
      Adieu, good Hobbinol, that was so true,
      Tell Rosalind, her Colin bids her adieu."


    COLIN'S EMBLEME.
    _Vivitur ingenio: cætera mortis erunt._
    (The creations of genius live; other things shall be the prey of
    death.)




    EPILOGUE.


    Lo! I have made a Calender for every year,
    That steel in strength, and time in durance, shall outwear;
    And, if I marked well the stars' revolution,
    It shall continue till the world's dissolution,
    To teach the ruder shepheard how to feed his sheep,
    And from the falser's fraud his folded flock to keep.
     Go, little Calender! thou hast a free passport;
    Go but a lowly gate amongst the meaner sort:
    Dare not to match thy pipe with Tityrus his style,
    Nor with the Pilgrim[22] that the ploughman play'd a while;
    But follow them far off, and their high steps adore;
    The better please, the worse despise; I ask no more.


    MERCE NON MERCEDE.
    (For recompense, but not for hire.)




NOTES.


_Page xviii, note 1._--The name of the writer of this letter is unknown.

_Page 5, note 2._--"Hobbinol:" the author's friend Gabriel Harvey.

_Page 10, note 3._--"Good Friday:" Good Friday is said to frown, as
being a fast-day.

_Page 16, note 4._--Thenot's emblem means, in substance, that God, who
is aged Himself, being without beginning of days, makes those whom He
loves, to be aged, like Himself; and that it is a mark of His favour to
be old. Cuddie's emblem is, "No old man fears God"--a sarcasm against
Thenot.

_Page 29, note 5._--"Tawdry:" is here used in its primitive sense,
denoting something bought at the fair of St. Ethelred, or St. Awdrey.

_Page 30, note 6._--"This poesy is taken out of Virgil, and there of him
used in the person of Æneas to his mother Venus, appearing to him in
likeness of one of Diana's damsels; being there most divinely set forth.
To which similitude of divinity Hobbinol comparing the excellency of
Elisa, and being through the worthiness of Colin's song, as it were,
overcome with the hugeness of his imagination, bursteth out in great
admiration, (_O quam te memorem virgo!_) being otherwise unable, than by
sudden silence, to express the worthiness of his conceit. Whom Thenot
answereth with another part of the like verse, as confirming by his
grant and approvance, that Elisa is no whit inferior to the majesty of
her, of whom the poet so boldly pronounced, _O dea certe!_"--E. K.

_Page 35, note 7._--"Algrind:" Archbishop Grindall.

_Page 37, note 8._--"Fox," "Kid:" "By the Kid may be understood the
simple sort of the faithful and true Christians; by his dam, Christ,
that hath already with careful watchwords (as here doth the Goat) warned
her little ones to beware of such doubling deceit; by the Fox, the false
and faithless Papists, to whom is no credit to be given, nor fellowship
to be used."--E. K.

_Page 41, note 9._--"Sir John:" a name applied to a Popish priest.

_Page 47, note 10._--"Tityrus:" Chaucer is meant.

_Page 53, note 11._--"Morrell:" supposed to be Elmer, or Aylmer, Bishop
of London.

_Page 53, note 12._--"The sun:" the sun enters Leo in July.

_Page 59, note 13._--"An eagle:" the same story is told of the death of
Eschylus.

_Pages 68, 69, note 14._--"The meaning hereof is very ambiguous: for
Perigot by his posy claiming the conquest, and Willie not yielding,
Cuddie the arbiter of their cause, and patron of his own, seemeth to
challenge it, as his due, saying, that he is happy which can; so
abruptly ending; but he meaneth either him, that can win the best, or
moderate himself being best, and leave off with the best."--E. K.

_Page 77, note 15._--"Saxon king:" King Edgar, in whose reign wolves are
said to have disappeared in England.

_Page 84, note 16._--"Elisa:" Queen Elizabeth; the "Worthy" is the Earl
of Leicester.

_Page 87, note 17._--This emblem is portion of a Latin verse, expressing
the thought of the pastoral, that poetry is a fervid glow of inspiration
which animates and kindles.

_Page 91, note 18._--"Fishes:" the sun enters the constellation Pisces
in November.

_Page 92, note 19._--"Dido" and "great shepheard" both refer to real
persons unknown.

_Page 94, note 20._--"Wrought with a chief:" wrought into a head, like a
nosegay.

_Page 101, note 21._--Translated freely from the French of Marot.

_Page 107, note 22._--"The pilgrim:" perhaps the author of the "Visions
of Pierce Ploughman."




    GLOSSARY.


    Accloyeth, _encumbereth_.
    Accoyed, _daunted_.
    Adawed, _daunted_.
    Adays, _every day_.
    Albe, _although_.
    Alegge, _assuage_.
    Algate, _at all events_.
    All, _although_.
    All be it, _although it be_.
    All-to, _entirely_.
    All-to rathe, _too early_.
    Als, _also_.
    Arede, _declare_, _repeat_, _explain_.
    Assayed, _affected_.
    Assert, _befall_.
    Assot, _stupid_.
    As weren overwent, _as if we were overcome_.
    At erst, _at last_.
    Attone, _also_.
    Attones, _at same time_.
    Availe, _bring down_, _lower_.
    Availes, _is lowered_.

    Babes, _dolls_.
    Bale, _ruin_.
    Balk, _miss_.
    Bate, bated, _fed_.
    Bedight, _affected_.
    Behight, behote, _called_.
    Belive, _promptly_.
    Bellibone (_belle et bonne_), _good and beautiful one_.
    Bend, _band_.
    Bene, _are_.
    Benempt, _named_, _mentioned_.
    Bent, _obedient_.
    Besprint, besprent, _besprinkled_.
    Betight, _betide_, _happened_.
    Bett, _better_.
    Bidding base, _game of prison base_.
    Biggen, _cap_.
    Bin, _be_.
    Black bower, _i.e._, _hell_.
    Bloncket liveries, _gray coats_.
    Blont, _unpolished_.
    Borrell, _rustic_.
    Borrow, _pledge_, _surety_, _Saviour_.
    Brace, _compass_.
    Brag, bragly, _proudly_.
    Breme, _sharp_.
    Brent, _burnt_.
    Brere, _brier_.
    Brocage, _pimping_.
    Bugle, _beads_.
    But, _unless_.
    Buxom, _yielding_.

    Can, _knows_.
    Careful, _sorrowful_.
    Careful case, _unhappy condition_.
    Cark, _sorrow_.
    Chaffred, _sold or exchanged_.
    Chamfred, _wrinkled_.
    Charm, _temper_, _tune_.
    Chevisance, _performance_, _result_, _bargain_.
    Chips, _fragments_.
    Collusion, _cunning_.
    Con, _know_.
    Cond, _learned_.
    Confusion, _destruction_.
    Contempt, _contemned_.
    Convenable, _conformable_.
    Corb, _crooked_.
    Cosset, _lamb_.
    Cote, _sheepfold_.
    Courage, _mind_.
    Couth, _knew how_, _could_.
    Cracknels, _biscuits_.
    Crag, _neck_.
    Crank, _courageous_.
    Crumenall, _purse_.

    Dapper ditties, _pretty songs_.
    Deed, _doing_, _composing_.
    Defast, _defaced_.
    Dempt, _deemed_.
    Depeincten, _painted_.
    Derring, _manly deeds_.
    Derring-do, _daring deeds_.
    Devoir, _duty_.
    Dight, _adorn_, _prepare_; _adorned_, _prepared_, _dealt with_.
    Dint, _pang of grief_.
    Dirk, _darkly_.
    Dirks, _darkens_.
    Disease, _disturb_.
    Dole, dool, _sorrow_, _grief_.
    Doom, _judgment_.
    Doubted, _redoubted_.
    Drent, _drowned_, _perished_.

    Eath, _easy_.
    Eft, _quickly_, _soon_.
    Eftsoons, _immediately_.
    Eked, _increased_.
    Eld, _age_.
    Embrave, _adorn_.
    Emprise, _enterprise_.
    Enaunter, _lest_, _lest that_.
    Enchased, _engraved_.
    Encheason, _occasion_.
    Entrailed, _intwined_.
    Erst, _before_, _at once_.
    Expert, _experience_.

    Faitours, _villains_, _vagabonds_.
    Falsers, _deceivers_.
    Fay, _faith_.
    File, _defile_.
    Fined, _sifted_.
    Fon, _fool_.
    Fond, _foolish_.
    Fondness, _folly_.
    Fonly, _foolishly_.
    Foresaid, _banished_.
    Foreslow, _impede_, _obstruct_.
    Forestall, _prevent_.
    Forhaile, _distress_.
    For-say, _forsake_.
    Forswat, _spent with heat_.
    Forswonk, _overlaboured_.
    Forthy, _therefore_, _on that account_.
    Frenne, _stranger_.
    Frorne, _frozen_.
    Frowy, _musty_.

    Galage, _wooden shoe_.
    Gang, _go_.
    Gars, _makes_.
    Gastful, _dreary_.
    Gate, _way_.
    Gelt, _a gilded girdle_.
    Giant, _Atlas_.
    Giusts, _tournaments_.
    Go, _gone_.
    Gree, _degree_.
    Greet, _weep_; _mourning_.
    Gride, gryde, _pierced_.
    Gross, _whole_.

    Harbrough, _habitation_.
    Hask, _basket_.
    Haveour, _demeanour_.
    Heme, _home_.
    Hent, _took_, _taken_.
    Hentst, _takest_.
    Herdgrooms, _herdsmen_.
    Herie, hery, _honour_, _praise_.
    Herse, _rehearsal_, _tale_.
    Heydeguys, _dances_.
    Hidder and shidder, _him and her_.
    Hight, _purports_; _was named_.
    Hote, _mentioned_; _was called_.

    If, _unless_.
    Ilk, _the same_.
    Inly, _inwardly_.
    Inn, _abode_.

    Jovisance, _joyousness_.

    Keep, _care, charge_.
    Ken, _know_.
    Kend, _known_.
    Kenst, _knowest_.
    Kerns, _farmers_.
    Kirk, _church_.
    Knack, _trick_.
    Knaves, _servants_.
    Kydst, _knowest_.

    Laid, _faint_.
    Larded, _fattened_.
    Latched, _caught_.
    Lays, _leas_, _fields_.
    Leasing, _falsehood_, _lies_.
    Lere, _lore_, _lesson_; _learn_.
    Lever, _rather_.
    Levin, _lightning_.
    Lewd, _foolish_.
    Lewdly, _foolishly_.
    Lief, _dear_, _beloved_.
    Lig, ligg, liggen, _lie_.
    Loord, _fellow_.
    Lope, _leaped_.
    Lorn, _left_, _lost_.
    Lorrell, _ignorant, worthless fellow_.
    Louted, _did honour_.
    Lust, _wishest_.
    Lustihed, _pleasure_.
    Lustless, _languid_.

    Maintenance, _behaviour_.
    Make, _versify_.
    Maugre, _in spite of_.
    May, _maid_.
    May-buskets, _May-bushes_.
    Mazer, _bowl_.
    Medle, _mingle_.
    Meint, _mingled_.
    Melling, _meddling_.
    Men of the lay, _laymen_.
    Ment, _mingled_.
    Merciable, _merciful_.
    Mickle, _much_.
    Miller's round, _a dance_.
    Mirk, _very obscure_.
    Miscreance, _unbelief_.
    Misgone, _gone astray_.
    Missay, _say evil_.
    Mister men, _kind of men_.
    Mister saying, _kind of speech_.
    Miswent, _gone astray_.
    Mizzle, _to rain a little_.
    Mochell, _much_.
    Moe, _more_.
    Most what, _affairs_.
    Most-what, _for the most part_.
    Musical, _music_.

    Narre, _nearer_.
    N'as, _has not_.
    Newell, _novelty_.
    Nighly, _nearly so much_.
    Nill, _will not_.
    N'is, _is not_.
    N'ote, _know not_.
    Nought seemeth, _is unseemly_.
    Nould, _would not_.

    Overcrawed, _overcrowed_.
    Overgone, _surpassed_.
    Overhale, _draw over_.
    Overture, _open place_.

    Paddocks, _toads_.
    Pained, _exerted himself_.
    Paramours, _lovers_.
    Paunce, _pansy_.
    Perdie, _in truth, truly_.
    Peregall, _equal_.
    Perk, _pert_.
    Pert, _open_.
    Pieced, _imperfect_.
    Pight, _put_, _placed_.
    Plainful, _lamentable_.
    Prick, _mark_.
    Pricket, _buck_.
    Prief, _proof_.
    Prime, _spring_.
    Primrose, _chief flower_.
    Pumie, _pumice_.
    Purchase, _obtain_.
    Purpose, _conversation_.

    Quaint, _strange_.
    Quell, _abate_.
    Queme, _please_.
    Quick, _alive_.
    Quit, _deliver_.

    Rathe, _early_.
    Rather, _born early_.
    Record, _repeat_.
    Rede, _saying_; _advise_, _tell_.
    Reliven, _live again_.
    Ribaudry, _ribaldry_.
    Rife, _frequent_.
    Rifely, _abundantly_.
    Rine, _rind_.
    Romish Tityrus, _Virgil_.
    Ronts, _young bullocks_.
    Roundel, _roundelay_.
    Routs, _companies_.
    Roved, _shot_.

    Sale, _wicker net_.
    Sam, _together_.
    Sample, _example_.
    Saye, _silk_.
    Scope, _mark aimed at_.
    Seely, _simple_.
    Sheen, _bright_.
    Shend, _disgrace_.
    Shepheard, _Abel_, _p. 56_;
     _Endymion_, _p. 55_;
     _Orpheus_, _p. 84_;
     _Paris_, _p. 57_.
    Shield, _forbid_.
    Sib, _related_.
    Sich, _such_.
    Sicker, siker, _surely_, _truly_.
    Sike, _such_.
    Site, _situation_.
    Sithence, sithens, _since_, _since that time_.
    Siths, _times_.
    Sits, _becomes_.
    Sits not, _is not becoming_.
    Skill in making, _in writing poetry_.
    Slipper, _slippery_, _uncertain_.
    Smirk, _nice_.
    Snebbe, _revile_.
    Somdele, _somewhat_, _in some degree_.
    Some quick, _something alive_.
    Sommed, _feathered_.
    Soote, _sweetly_.
    Sooth, _soothsaying_.
    Sops-in-wine, _a flower_.
    Sovenance, _remembrance_.
    So well the wed, _of such sound morals_.
    Sperr, _shut_.
    Spill, _spoil_, _ruin_, _injure_.
    Stank, _weary_.
    State, _stoutly_.
    Steven, _noise_.
    Stound, _effort_; _hour_.
    Stounds, _pains_; _occasions_.
    Stour, _assault_.
    Stoure, _occasion_.
    Stoures, _attacks_.
    Stowre, _affliction_, _violence_.
    Strain, _imbody in strains_.
    Strait, _strict_.
    Strow, _display_.
    Stud, _trunk_.
    Sullen, _sad_.
    Surquedry, _pride_.
    Swink, _toil_.

    Tabrere, _taborer_.
    Teen, _sorrow_.
    That, _that which_.
    Thereto, _also_.
    Thick, _thicket_.
    Thilk, _this_, _these_, _this same_, _that same_.

    Tickle, _uncertain_.
    Tinct, _coloured_.
    Tityrus, _Chaucer_.
    Tod, _thick bush_.
    To-force, _perforce_.
    Tooting, _looking about_.
    Totty, _wavering_.
    Trace, _go_.
    Trains, _snares_.
    Trode, troad, _tread_, _path_.
    Truss, _bundle_.
    Tway, _two_.

    Uncouth, _unknown_.
    Underfong, _tamper with_, _undertake_.
    Undersay, _say in contradiction_.
    Uneath, _scarcely_.
    Unkempt, _unpolished_.
    Unkent, _unknown_.
    Unlustiness, _feebleness_.
    Unnethes, _scarcely_.
    Unsoot, _unsweet_.
    Uprist, _uprisen_.
    Utter, _put forth_.

    Venteth, _snuffeth_.
    Vetchy, _of pease straw_.
    Virelays, _songs_.

    War, _worse_.
    Warre, _ware_.
    Weanel wast, _weaned youngling_.
    Weed, _dress_.
    Weet, _know_.
    Weighed, _esteemed_.
    Weld, _wield_, _bear_.
    Welked, _decreased_, _shortened_.
    Well apaid, _in good condition_.
    Wellaway, _alas!_
    Wend, _go_.
    What, _matter_, _thing_.
    What is he for a lad? _what sort of lad is he?_
    Whilome, _formerly_.
    Widder, _wider_.
    Wight, _active_.
    Wightly, _quickly_.
    Wimble, _nimble_.
    Wisards, _learned men_.
    Wist, _knew_.
    Witen, _blame_.
    Wonned, _dwelt_.
    Wood, _mad_, _wild_.
    Worthy wite, _deserved blame_.
    Wot, wote, _know_.
    Wot ne, _know not_.
    Woundless, _unwounded_.
    Wrack, _violence_.
    Wroken, _avenged_.

    Yblent, _blinded_.
    Yconned, _conned_.
    Yede, _go_, _went_.
    Yeven, _given_.
    Yfere, _together_.
    Ygo, ygoe, _gone_.
    Yode, _went_.
    Yond, _yonder_.
    Ypent, _pent_, _confined_.
    Yshend, _disparage_.
    Ytake, _taken_, _overcome_.
    Ytost, _be harassed_.
    Ywis, _truly_.

