

THE

POETICAL WORKS

OF

EDMUND SPENSER.

VOLUME V.


M.DCCC.LX.


CONTENTS

OF THE FIFTH VOLUME.

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANIES.

Complaints

  The Ruines of Time
  The Teares of the Muses
  Virgils Gnat
  Prosopopoia: or Mother Hubberds Tale
  Ruines of Rome: by Bellay
  Muiopotmos: or the Fate of the Butterflie
  Visions of the Worlds Vanitie
  The Visions of Bellay
  The Visions of Petrarch

Daphnaida

Amoretti

Epithalamion

Prothalamion

Fowre Hymnes

Epigrams

Sonnets

APPENDIX.

I. Variations from the Original Editions

II. Two Letters from Spenser to Harvey

III. Index of Proper Names

       *       *       *       *       *


MISCELLANIES.



COMPLAINTS.

CONTAINING SUNDRIE SMALL POEMES OF THE
WORLDS VANITIE:

WHEREOF THE NEXT PAGE MAKETH MENTION.

BY ED. SP.

       *       *       *       *       *

LONDON:

IMPRINTED FOR WILLIAM PONSONBIE, DWELLING IN PAULES
CHURCHYARD AT THE SIGNE OF THE BISHOPS HEAD.

1591.


       *       *       *       *       *

A NOTE OF THE SUNDRIE POEMES CONTAINED IN THIS VOLUME.

1. The Ruines of Time.

2. The Teares of the Muses.

3. Virgils Gnat.

4. Prosopopoia, or Mother Hubberds Tale.

5. The Ruines of Rome: by Bellay.

6. Muiopotmos, or The Tale of the Butterflie.

7. Visions of the Worlds Vanitie.

8. Bellayes Visions.

9. Petrarches Visions.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRINTER TO THE GENTLE READER.


Since my late setting foorth of the Faerie Queene, finding that it hath
found a favourable passage amongst you, I have sithence endevoured by
all good meanes, (for the better encrease and accomplishment of your
delights,) to get into my handes such smale poemes of the same Authors
as I heard were disperst abroad in sundrie hands, and not easie to bee
come by by himselfe; some of them having bene diverslie imbeziled and
purloyned from him, since his departure over sea. Of the which I have
by good meanes gathered togeather these fewe parcels present, which I
have caused to bee imprinted altogeather, for that they al seeme to
containe like matter of argument in them, being all complaints and
meditations of the worlds vanitie, verie grave and profitable. To which
effect I understand that he besides wrote sundrie others, namelie:
_Ecclesiastes_ and _Canticum Canticorum_ translated, _A Senights
Slumber, The Hell of Lovers, his Purgatorie_, being all dedicated to
ladies, so as it may seeme he ment them all to one volume: besides some
other pamphlets looselie scattered abroad; as _The Dying Pellican, The
Howers of the Lord, The Sacrifice of a Sinner, The Seven Psalmes_, &c.,
which, when I can either by himselfe or otherwise attaine too, I meane
likewise for your favour sake to set foorth. In the meane time, praying
you gentlie to accept of these, and graciouslie to entertaine the new
Poet*, I take leave.

[* Spenser had printed nothing with his name before the Faerie
Queene.--Ponsonby's account of the way in which this volume was
collected is rather loose. The Ruins of Time and The Tears of the Muses
were certainly written shortly before they were published, and there
can be equally little doubt that Mother Hubberd's Tale was retouched
about the same time. C.]



THE RUINES OF TIME.


DEDICATED

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND BEAUTIFULL LADIE,

THE LA: MARIE,

COUNTESSE OF PEMEBROOKE.


Most honourable and bountifull Ladie, there bee long sithens deepe
sowed in my brest the seede of most entire love and humble affection
unto that most brave knight, your noble brother deceased; which, taking
roote, began in his life time somewhat to bud forth, and to shew
themselves to him, as then in the weakenes of their first spring; and
would in their riper strength (had it pleased High God till then to
drawe out his daies) spired forth fruit of more perfection. But since
God hath disdeigned the world of that most noble spirit which was the
hope of all learned men, and the patron of my young Muses, togeather
with him both their hope of anie further fruit was cut off, and also
the tender delight of those their first blossoms nipped and quite dead.
Yet, sithens my late cumming into England, some frends of mine, which
might much prevaile with me, and indeede commaund me, knowing with howe
straight bandes of duetie I was tied to him, as also bound unto that
noble house, of which the chiefs hope then rested in him, have sought
to revive them by upbraiding me, for that I have not shewed anie
thankefull remembrance towards him or any of them, but suffer their
names to sleep in silence and forgetfulnesse. Whome chieflie to
satisfie, or els to avoide that fowle blot of unthankefulnesse, I have
conceived this small Poeme, intituled by a generall name of _The Worlds
Ruines;_ yet speciallie intended to the renowming of that noble race
from which both you and he sprong, and to the eternizing of some of the
chiefe of them late deceased. The which I dedicate unto your La. as
whome it most speciallie concerneth, and to whome I acknowledge my
selfe bounden by manie singular favours and great graces. I pray for
your honourable happinesse, and so humblie kisse your handes.

Your Ladiships ever

humblie at commaund,

E.S.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE RUINES OF TIME.


It chaunced me on* day beside the shore
Of silver streaming Thamesis to bee,
Nigh where the goodly Verlame stood of yore,
Of which there now remaines no memorie,
Nor anie little moniment to see,                                       5
By which the travailer that fares that way
_This once was she_ may warned be to say.
  [* _On_, one.]

There, on the other side, I did behold
A Woman sitting sorrowfullie wailing,
Rending her yeolow locks, like wyrie golde                            10
About her shoulders careleslie downe trailing,
And streames of teares from her faire eyes forth railing*:
In her right hand a broken rod she held,
Which towards heaven shee seemd on high to weld,
  [* _Railing_, flowing.]

Whether she were one of that rivers nymphes,                          15
Which did the losse of some dere Love lament,
I doubt; or one of those three fatall impes
Which draw the dayes of men forth in extent;
Or th'auncient genius of that citie brent*;
But, seeing her so piteouslie perplexed,                              20
I, to her calling, askt what her so vexed.
  [* _Brent_, burnt.]

"Ah! what delight," quoth she, "in earthlie thing,
Or comfort can I, wretched creature, have?
Whose happines the heavens envying,
From highest staire to lowest step me drave,                          25
And have in mine owne bowels made my grave,
That of all nations now I am forlorne*,
The worlds sad spectacle, and Fortunes scorne."
  [* _Forlorne_, forsaken.]

Much was I mooved at her piteous plaint,
And felt my heart nigh riven in my brest                              30
With tender ruth to see her sore constraint;
That, shedding teares, a while I still did rest,
And after did her name of her request.
"Name have I none," quoth she, "nor anie being,
Bereft of both by Fates uniust decreeing.                             35

"I was that citie which the garland wore
Of Britaines pride, delivered unto me
By Romane victors which it wonne of yore;
Though nought at all but ruines now I bee,
And lye in mine owne ashes, as ye see,                                40
VERLAME I was; what bootes it that I was,
Sith now I am but weedes and wastfull gras?

"O vaine worlds glorie, and unstedfast state
Of all that lives on face of sinfull earth!
Which, from their first untill their utmost date,                     45
Tast no one hower of happines or merth;
But like as at the ingate* of their berth
They crying creep out of their mothers woomb,
So wailing backe go to their wofull toomb.
  [* _Ingate_, entrance, beginning.]

"Why then dooth flesh, a bubble-glas of breath,                       50
Hunt after honour and advauncement vaine,
And reare a trophee for devouring death
With so great labour and long-lasting paine,
As if his daies for ever should remaine?
Sith all that in this world is great or gaie                          55
Doth as a vapour vanish and decaie.

"Looke backe, who list, unto the former ages,
And call to count what is of them become.
Where be those learned wits and antique sages,
Which of all wisedome knew the perfect somme?                         60
Where those great warriors, which did overcome
The world with conquest of their might and maine,
And made one meare* of th'earth and of their raine?
  [* _Meare_, boundary.]

"What nowe is of th'Assyrian Lyonesse,
Of whome no footing now on earth appeares?                            65
What of the Persian Beares outragiousnesse,
Whose memorie is quite worne out with yeares?
Who of the Grecian Libbard* now ought heares,
That over-ran the East with greedie powre,
And left his whelps their kingdomes to devoure?                       70
  [* _Libbard_, leopard]

"And where is that same great seven-headded beast,
That made all nations vassals of her pride,
To fall before her feete at her beheast,
And in the necke of all the world did ride?
Where doth she all that wondrous welth nowe hide?                     75
With her own weight downe pressed now shee lies,
And by her heaps her hugenesse testifies.

"O Rome, thy ruine I lament and rue,
And in thy fall my fatall overthrowe,
That whilom was, whilst heavens with equall vewe                      80
Deignd to behold me and their gifts bestowe,
The picture of thy pride in pompous shew:
And of the whole world as thou wast the empresse,
So I of this small Northerne world was princesse.

"To tell the beawtie of my buildings fayre,                           85
Adornd with purest golde and precious stone,
To tell my riches and endowments rare,
That by my foes are now all spent and gone,
To tell my forces, matchable to none,
Were but lost labour that few would beleeve,                          90
And with rehearsing would me more agreeve.

"High towers, faire temples, goodly theaters,
Strong walls, rich porches, princelie pallaces,
Large streetes, brave houses, sacred sepulchers,
Sure gates, sweete gardens, stately galleries                         95
Wrought with faire pillours and fine imageries,--
All those, O pitie! now are turnd to dust,
And overgrowen with blacke oblivions rust.

"Theretoo, for warlike power and peoples store
In Britannie was none to match with mee,                             100
That manie often did abie full sore:
Ne Troynovant*, though elder sister shee,
With my great forces might compared bee;
That stout Pendragon to his perill felt,
Who in a siege seaven yeres about me dwelt.                          105
  [* _Troynovant_, London]

"But long ere this, Bunduca, Britonnesse,
Her mightie hoast against my bulwarkes brought;
Bunduca! that victorious conqueresse,
That, lifting up her brave heroick thought
Bove womens weaknes, with the Romanes fought,                        110
Fought, and in field against them thrice prevailed:
Yet was she foyld, when as she me assailed.

"And though at last by force I conquered were
Of hardie Saxons, and became their thrall,
Yet was I with much bloodshed bought full deere,                     115
And prizde with slaughter of their generall,
The moniment of whose sad funerall,
For wonder of the world, long in me lasted,
But now to nought, through spoyle of time, is wasted.

"Wasted it is, as if it never were;                                  120
And all the rest that me so honord made,
And of the world admired ev'rie where,
Is turnd to smoake that doth to nothing fade;
And of that brightnes now appeares no shade,
But greislie shades, such as doo haunt in hell                       125
With fearfull fiends that in deep darknes dwell.

"Where my high steeples whilom usde to stand,
On which the lordly faulcon wont to towre,
There now is but an heap of lyme and sand
For the shriche-owle to build her balefull bowre:                    130
And where the nightingale wont forth to powre
Her restles plaints, to comfort wakefull lovers,
There now haunt yelling mewes and whining plovers.

"And where the christall Thamis wont to slide
In silver channell downe along the lee,                              135
About whose flowrie bankes on either side
A thousand nymphes, with mirthfull iollitee,
Were wont to play, from all annoyance free,
There now no rivers course is to be seene,
But moorish fennes, and marshes ever greene.                         140

"Seemes that that gentle river, for great griefe
Of my mishaps which oft I to him plained,
Or for to shunne the horrible mischiefe
With which he saw my cruell foes me pained,
And his pure streames with guiltles blood oft stained,
From my unhappie neighborhood farre fled,                            145
And his sweete waters away with him led.

"There also where the winged ships were seene
In liquid waves to cut their fomie waie,
And thousand fishers numbred to have been,                           150
In that wide lake looking for plenteous praie
Of fish, which they with baits usde to betraie,
Is now no lake, nor anie fishers store,
Nor ever ship shall saile there anie more.

"They all are gone, and all with them is gone!                       155
Ne ought to me remaines, but to lament
My long decay, which no man els doth mone,
And mourne my fall with dolefull dreriment:
Yet it is comfort in great languishment,
To be bemoned with compassion kinde,                                 160
And mitigates the anguish of the minde.

"But me no man bewaileth, but in game
Ne sheddeth teares from lamentable eie;
Nor anie lives that mentioneth my name
To be remembred of posteritie,                                       165
Save one, that maugre Fortunes iniurie,
And Times decay, and Envies cruell tort*,
Hath writ my record in true-seeming sort.
  [* _Tort_, wrong]

"CAMBDEN! the nourice* of antiquitie,
And lanterne unto late succeding age                                 170
To see the light of simple veritie
Buried in ruines, through the great outrage
Of her owne people led with warlike rage,
CAMBDEN! though Time all moniments obscure,
Yet thy iust labours ever shall endure.                              175
  [* _Nourice_, nurse]

"But whie, unhappie wight! doo I thus crie,
And grieve that my remembrance quite is raced*
Out of the knowledge of posteritie,
And all my antique moniments defaced?
Sith I doo dailie see things highest placed,                         180
So soone as Fates their vitall thred have shorne,
Forgotten quite as they were never borne
  [* _Raced_, razed.]

"It is not long, since these two eyes beheld
A mightie Prince*, of most renowmed race,
Whom England high in count of honour held,                           185
And greatest ones did sue to game his grace;
Of greatest ones he, greatest in his place,
Sate in the bosom of his Soveraine,
And _Right and Loyall_** did his word maintaine.
  [* I. e. the Earl of Leicester.]
  [** Leicester's motto.]

"I saw him die, I saw him die as one                                 190
Of the meane people, and brought foorth on beare;
I saw him die, and no man left to mone
His dolefull fate that late him loved deare;
Scarse anie left to close his eylids neare;
Scarse anie left upon his lips to laie                               195
The sacred sod, or requiem to saie.

"O trustlesse state of miserable men,
That builde your blis on hope of earthly thing,
And vainly thinke your selves halfe happie then,
When painted faces with smooth flattering                            200
Doo fawne on you, and your wide praises sing;
And, when the courting masker louteth* lowe,
Him true in heart and trustie to you trow!
  [* _Louteth_, boweth.]

"All is but fained, and with oaker* dide,
That everie shower will wash and wipe away;                          205
All things doo change that under heaven abide,
And after death all friendship doth decaie.
Therefore, what ever man bearst worldlie sway,
Living, on God and on thy selfe relie;
For, when thou diest, all shall with thee die.                       210
  [* _Oaker_, ochre, paint.]

"He now is dead, and all is with him dead,
Save what in heavens storehouse he uplaid:
His hope is faild, and come to passe his dread,
And evill men (now dead) his deeds upbraid:
Spite bites the dead, that living never baid.                        215
He now is gone, the whiles the foxe is crept
Into the hole the which the badger swept.

"He now is dead, and all his glorie gone,
And all his greatnes vapoured to nought,
That as a glasse upon the water shone,                               220
Which vanisht quite so soone as it was sought.
His name is worne alreadie out of thought,
Ne anie poet seekes him to revive;
Yet manie poets honourd him alive.

"Ne doth his Colin, carelesse Colin Cloute,                          225
Care now his idle bagpipe up to raise,
Ne tell his sorrow to the listning rout
Of shepherd groomes, which wont his songs to praise:
Praise who so list, yet I will him dispraise,
Untill he quite* him of this guiltie blame.                          230
Wake, shepheards boy, at length awake for shame!
  [* _Quite_, acquit.]

"And who so els did goodnes by him game,
And who so els his bounteous minde did trie*,
Whether he shepheard be, or shepheards swaine,
(For manie did, which doo it now denie,)                             235
Awake, and to his song a part applie:
And I, the whilest you mourne for his decease,
Will with my mourning plaints your plaint increase.
  [* _Trie_, experience.]

"He dyde, and after him his brother dyde,
His brother prince, his brother noble peere,                         240
That whilste he lived was of none envyde,
And dead is now, as living, counted deare;
Deare unto all that true affection beare,
But unto thee most deare, O dearest Dame,
His noble spouse and paragon of fame.                                245

"He, whilest he lived, happie was through thee,
And, being dead, is happie now much more;
Living, that lincked chaunst with thee to bee,
And dead, because him dead thou dost adore
As living, and thy lost deare love deplore.                          250
So whilst that thou, faire flower of chastitie,
Dost live, by thee thy lord shall never die.

"Thy lord shall never die, the whiles this verse
Shall live, and surely it shall live for ever:
For ever it shall live, and shall rehearse                           255
His worthie praise, and vertues dying never,
Though death his soule doo from his bodie sever:
And thou thy selfe herein shalt also live;
Such grace the heavens doo to my verses give.

"Ne shall his sister, ne thy father, die;                            260
Thy father, that good earle of rare renowne,
And noble patrone of weake povertie;
Whose great good deeds, in countrey and in towne.
Have purchast him in heaven an happie crowne:
Where he now liveth in eternall blis,                                265
And left his sonne t'ensue those steps of his.

"He, noble bud, his grandsires livelie hayre,
Under the shadow of thy countenaunce
Now ginnes to shoote up fast, and flourish fayre
In learned artes, and goodlie governaunce,                           270
That him to highest honour shall advaunce.
Brave impe* of Bedford, grow apace in bountie,
And count of wisedome more than of thy countie!
  [* _Impe_, graft, scion.]

"Ne may I let thy husbands sister die,
That goodly ladie, sith she eke did spring                           275
Out of this stocke and famous familie
Whose praises I to future age doo sing;
And foorth out of her happie womb did bring
The sacred brood of learning and all honour;
In whom the heavens powrde all their gifts upon her.

"Most gentle spirite breathed from above,                            281
Out of the bosome of the Makers blis,
In whom all bountie and all vertuous love
Appeared in their native propertis,
And did enrich that noble breast of his                              285
With treasure passing all this worldës worth,
Worthie of heaven it selfe, which brought it forth:

"His blessed spirite, full of power divine
And influence of all celestiall grace,
Loathing this sinfull earth and earthlie slime,                      290
Fled backe too soonc unto his native place;
Too soone for all that did his love embrace,
Too soone for all this wretched world, whom he
Robd of all right and true nobilitie.

"Yet, ere his happie soule to heaven went                            295
Out of this fleshlie goale, he did devise
Unto his heavenlie Maker to present
His bodie, as a spotles sacrifise,
And chose that guiltie hands of enemies
Should powre forth th'offring of his guiltles blood:
So life exchanging for his countries good.                           300

"O noble spirite, live there ever blessed,
The worlds late wonder, and the heavens new ioy;
Live ever there, and leave me here distressed
With mortall cares and cumbrous worlds anoy!                         305
But, where thou dost that happines enioy,
Bid me, O bid me quicklie come to thee,
That happie there I maie thee alwaies see!

"Yet, whilest the Fates affoord me vitall breath,
I will it spend in speaking of thy praise,                           310
And sing to thee, untill that timelie death
By heavens doome doo ende my earthlie daies:
Thereto doo thou my humble spirite raise,
And into me that sacred breath inspire,
Which thou there breathest perfect and entire.                       315

"Then will I sing; but who can better sing
Than thine owne sister, peerles ladie bright,
Which to thee sings with deep harts sorrowing,
Sorrowing tempered with deare delight,
That her to heare I feele my feeble spright                          320
Robbed of sense, and ravished with ioy;
O sad ioy, made of mourning and anoy!

"Yet will I sing; but who can better sing
Than thou thyselfe thine owne selfes valiance,
That, whilest thou livedst, madest the forrests ring,                325
And fields resownd, and flockes to leap and daunce,
And shepheards leave their lambs unto mischaunce,
To runne thy shrill Arcadian pipe to heare:
O happie were those dayes, thrice happie were!

"But now more happie thou, and wretched wee,                         330
Which want the wonted sweetnes of thy voice,
Whiles thou now in Elisian fields so free,
With Orpheus, and with Linus, and the choice
Of all that ever did in rimes reioyce,
Conversest, and doost heare their heavenlie layes,                   335
And they heare thine, and thine doo better praise.

"So there thou livest, singing evermore,
And here thou livest, being ever song
Of us, which living loved thee afore,
And now thee worship mongst that blessed throng                      340
Of heavenlie poets and heroës strong.
So thou both here and there immortall art,
And everie where through excellent desart.

"But such as neither of themselves can sing,
Nor yet are sung of others for reward,                               345
Die in obscure oblivion, as the thing
Which never was; ne ever with regard
Their names shall of the later age be heard,
But shall in rustic darknes ever lie,
Unles they mentiond be with infamie.                                 350

"What booteth it to have been rich alive?
What to be great? what to be gracious?
When after death no token doth survive
Of former being in this mortall hous,
But sleepes in dust dead and inglorious,                             355
Like beast, whose breath but in his nostrels is,
And hath no hope of happinesse or blis.

"How manie great ones may remembred be,
Which in their daies most famouslie did florish,
Of whome no word we heare, nor signe now see,                        360
But as things wipt out with a sponge to perishe,
Because they living cared not to cherishe
No gentle wits, through pride or covetize,
Which might their names for ever memorize!

"Provide therefore, ye Princes, whilst ye live,                      365
That of the Muses ye may friended bee,
Which unto men eternitie do give;
For they be daughters of Dame Memorie
And love, the father of Eternitie,
And do those men in golden thrones repose,                           370
Whose merits they to glorifie do chose.

"The seven-fold yron gates of grislie Hell,
And horrid house of sad Proserpina,
They able are with power of mightie spell
To breake, and thence the soules to bring awaie                      375
Out of dread darkenesse to eternall day,
And them immortall make which els would die
In foule forgetfulnesse, and nameles lie.

"So whilome raised they the puissant brood
Of golden-girt Alcmena, for great merite,                            380
Out of the dust to which the Oetaean wood
Had him consum'd, and spent his vitall spirite,
To highest heaven, where now he doth inherite
All happinesse in Hebes silver bowre,
Chosen to be her dearest paramoure.                                  385

"So raisde they eke faire Ledaes warlick twinnes.
And interchanged life unto them lent,
That, when th'one diës, th'other then beginnes
To shew in heaven his brightnes orient;
And they, for pittie of the sad wayment*,                            390
Which Orpheus for Eurydice did make,
Her back againe to life sent for his sake.
  [* _Wayment_, lament.]

"So happie are they, and so fortunate,
Whom the Pierian sacred sisters love,
That freed from bands of impacable** fate,                           395
And power of death, they live for aye above,
Where mortall wreakes their blis may not remove:
But with the gods, for former verities meede,
On nectar and ambrosia do feede.
  [* _Impacable_, unappeasable.]

"For deeds doe die, how ever noblie donne,                           400
And thoughts of men do as themselves decay;
But wise wordes taught in numbers for to runne,
Recorded by the Muses, live for ay;
Ne may with storming showers be washt away,
Ne bitter-breathing windes with harmfull blast,                      405
Nor age, nor envie, shall them ever wast.

"In vaine doo earthly princes then, in vaine,
Seeke with pyramides to heaven aspired,
Or huge colosses built with costlie paine,
Or brasen pillours never to be fired,                                410
Or shrines made of the mettall most desired,
To make their memories for ever live:
For how can mortall immortalitie give?

"Such one Mausolus made, the worlds great wonder,
But now no remnant doth thereof remaine:                             415
Such one Marcellus, but was torne with thunder:
Such one Lisippus, but is worne with raine:
Such one King Edmond, but was rent for gaine.
All such vaine moniments of earthlie masse,
Devour'd of Time, in time to nought doo passe.                       420

"But Fame with golden wings aloft doth flie,
Above the reach of ruinous decay,
And with brave plumes doth beate the azure skie,
Admir'd of base-borne men from farre away:
Then who so will with vertuous deeds assay                           425
To mount to heaven, on Pegasus must ride,
And with sweete Poets verse be glorifide.

"For not to have been dipt in Lethe lake,
Could save the sonne of Thetis from to die;
But that blinde bard did him immortall make                          430
With verses dipt in deaw of Castalie:
Which made the Easterne conquerour to crie,
O fortunate yong man! whose vertue found
So brave a trompe thy noble acts to sound.

"Therefore in this halfe happie I doo read*                          435
Good Melibae, that hath a poet got
To sing his living praises being dead,
Deserving never here to be forgot,
In spight of envie, that his deeds would spot:
Since whose decease, learning lies unregarded,                       440
And men of armes doo wander unrewarded.
  [* _Read_, consider]

"Those two be those two great calamities,
That long agoe did grieve the noble spright
Of Salomon with great indignities,
Who whilome was alive the wisest wight:                              445
But now his wisedome is disprooved quite,
For he that now welds* all things at his will
Scorns th'one and th'other in his deeper skill.
  [* _Welds_, wields]

"O griefe of griefes! O gall of all good heartes!
To see that vertue should dispised bee                               450
Of him that first was raisde for vertuous parts,
And now, broad spreading like an aged tree,
Lets none shoot up that nigh him planted bee.
O let the man of whom the Muse is scorned,
Nor alive nor dead, be of the Muse adorned!                          455

"O vile worlds trust! that with such vaine illusion
Hath so wise men bewitcht and overkest*,
That they see not the way of their confusion:
O vainesse to be added to the rest
That do my soule with inward griefe infest!                          460
Let them behold the piteous fall of mee,
And in my case their owne ensample see.
  [* _Overkest_, overcast.]

"And who so els that sits in highest seate
Of this worlds glorie, worshipped of all,
Ne feareth change of time, nor fortunes threats,                     465
Let him behold the horror of my fall,
And his owne end unto remembrance call;
That of like ruine he may warned bee,
And in himselfe be moov'd to pittie mee."

Thus having ended all her piteous plaint,                            470
With dolefull shrikes shee vanished away,
That I, through inward sorrowe wexen faint,
And all astonished with deepe dismay
For her departure, had no word to say;
But sate long time in sencelesse sad affright,                       475
Looking still, if I might of her have sight.

Which when I missed, having looked long,
My thought returned greeved home againe,
Renewing her complaint with passion strong,
For ruth of that same womans piteous paine;                          480
Whose wordes recording in my troubled braine,
I felt such anguish wound my feeble heart,
That frosen horror ran through everie part.

So inlie greeving in my groning brest,
And deepelie muzing at her doubtfull speach,                         485
Whose meaning much I labored foorth to wreste,
Being above my slender reasons reach,
At length, by demonstration me to teach,
Before mine eies strange sights presented were,
Like tragicke pageants seeming to appeare.                           490


I.

I saw an Image, all of massie gold,
Placed on high upon an altare faire,
That all which did the same from farre beholde
Might worship it, and fall on lowest staire.
Not that great idoll might with this compaire,                       495
To which th'Assyrian tyrant would have made
The holie brethren falslie to have praid.

But th'altare on the which this image staid
Was (O great pitie!) built of brickle* clay,
That shortly the foundation decaid,                                  500
With showres of heaven and tempests worne away;
Then downe it fell, and low in ashes lay,
Scorned of everie one which by it went;
That I, it seing, dearelie did lament.
  [* _Brickle_, brittle.]

II.

Next unto this a statelie Towre appeared,                            505
Built all of richest stone that might bee found,
And nigh unto the heavens in height upreared,
But placed on a plot of sandie ground:
Not that great towre which is so much renownd
For tongues confusion in Holie Writ,                                 510
King Ninus worke, might be compar'd to it.

But, O vaine labours of terrestriall wit,
That buildes so stronglie on so frayle a soyle,
As with each storme does fall away and flit,
And gives the fruit of all your travailes toyle                      515
To be the pray of Tyme, and Fortunes spoyle,
I saw this towre fall sodainlie to dust,
That nigh with griefe thereof my heart was brust.

III.

Then did I see a pleasant Paradize,
Full of sweete flowres and daintiest delights,                       520
Such as on earth man could not more devize,
With pleasures choyce to feed his cheereful sprights:
Not that which Merlin by his magicke slights
Made for the gentle Squire, to entertaine
His fayre Belphoebe, could this gardine staine.                      525

But O short pleasure bought with lasting paine!
Why will hereafter anie flesh delight
In earthlie blis, and ioy in pleasures vaine?
Since that I sawe this gardine wasted quite,
That where it was scarce seemed anie sight;                          530
That I, which once that beautie did beholde,
Could not from teares my melting eyes with-holde.

IV.

Soone after this a Giaunt came in place,
Of wondrous power, and of exceeding stature,
That none durst vewe the horror of his face;                         535
Yet was he milde of speach, and meeke of nature.
Not he which in despight of his Creatour
With railing tearmes defied the Iewish hoast,
Might with this mightie one in hugenes boast;

For from the one he could to th'other coast                          540
Stretch his strong thighes, and th'ocean overstride,
And reatch his hand into his enemies hoast.
But see the end of pompe and fleshlie pride!
One of his feete unwares from him did slide,
That downe hee fell into the deepe abisse,                           545
Where drownd with him is all his earthlie blisse.

V.

Then did I see a Bridge, made all of golde,
Over the sea from one to other side,
Withouten prop or pillour it t'upholde,
But like the coloured rainbowe arched wide:                          550
Not that great arche which Traian edifide,
To be a wonder to all age ensuing,
Was matchable to this in equall vewing.

But ah! what bootes it to see earthlie thing
In glorie or in greatnes to excell,                                  555
Sith time doth greatest things to ruine bring?
This goodlie bridge, one foote not fastned well,
Gan faile, and all the rest downe shortlie fell,
Ne of so brave a building ought remained,
That griefe thereof my spirite greatly pained.                       560

VI.
I saw two Beares, as white as anie milke,
Lying together in a mightie cave,
Of milde aspect, and haire as soft as silke,
That salvage nature seemed not to have,
Nor after greedie spoyle of blood to crave:                          565
Two fairer beasts might not elswhere be found,
Although the compast* world were sought around.
  [* _Compast_, rounded.]

But what can long abide above this ground
In state of blis, or stedfast happinesse?
The cave in which these beares lay sleeping sound
Was but earth, and with her owne weightinesse                        571
Upon them fell, and did unwares oppresse;
That, for great sorrow of their sudden fate,
Henceforth all worlds felicitie I hate.

Much was I troubled in my heavie spright,                            575
At sight of these sad spectacles forepast,
That all my senses were bereaved quight,
And I in minde remained sore agast,
Distraught twixt feare and pitie; when at last
I heard a voyce which loudly to me called,                           580
That with the suddein shrill I was appalled.

"Behold," said it, "and by ensample see,
That all is vanitie and griefe of minde,
Ne other comfort in this world can be,
But hope of heaven, and heart to God inclinde;                       585
For all the rest must needs be left behinde."
With that it bad me to the other side
To cast mine eye, where other sights I spide.

I.

Upon that famous rivers further shore,
There stood a snowie Swan, of heavenly hiew                          590
And gentle kinde as ever fowle afore;
A fairer one in all the goodlie criew
Of white Strimonian brood might no man view:
There he most sweetly sung the prophecie
Of his owne death in dolefull elegie.                                595

At last, when all his mourning melodie
He ended had, that both the shores resounded,
Feeling the fit that him forewarnd to die,
With loftie flight above the earth he bounded,
And out of sight to highest heaven mounted,                          600
Where now he is become an heavenly signe;
There now the ioy is his, here sorrow mine.

II.

Whilest thus I looked, loe! adowne the lee*
I sawe an Harpe, stroong all with silver twyne,
And made of golde and costlie yvorie,                                605
Swimming, that whilome seemed to have been
The harpe on which Dan Orpheus was seene
Wylde beasts and forrests after him to lead,
But was th'harpe of Philisides** now dead.
  [* _Lee_, surface of the stream.]
  [** _Phili-sid-es_, Sir Philip Sidney]

At length out of the river it was reard,                             610
And borne above the cloudes to be divin'd,
Whilst all the way most heavenly noyse was heard
Of the strings, stirred with the warbling wind,
That wrought both ioy and sorrow in my mind:
So now in heaven a signe it doth appeare,                            615
The Harpe well knowne beside the Northern Beare.

III.

Soone after this I saw on th'other side
A curious Coffer made of heben* wood,
That in it did most precious treasure hide,
Exceeding all this baser worldës good:                               620
Yet through the overflowing of the flood
It almost drowned was and done to nought,
That sight thereof much griev'd my pensive thought.
  [* _Heben_, ebony.]

At length, when most in perill it was brought,
Two angels, downe descending with swift flight,                      625
Out of the swelling streame it lightly caught,
And twixt their blessed armes it carried quight
Above the reach of anie living sight:
So now it is transform'd into that starre,
In which all heavenly treasures locked are.                          630

IV.

Looking aside I saw a stately Bed,
Adorned all with costly cloth of gold,
That might for anie princes couche be red*,
And deckt with daintie flowres, as if it shold
Be for some bride, her ioyous night to hold:                         635
Therein a goodly virgine sleeping lay;
A fairer wight saw never summers day.
  [* _Red_, taken.]

I heard a voyce that called farre away,
And her awaking bad her quickly dight,
For lo! her bridegrome was in readie ray                             640
To come to her, and seeke her loves delight:
With that she started up with cherefull sight,
When suddeinly both bed and all was gone,
And I in languor left there all alone.

V.

Still as I gazed, I beheld where stood                               645
A Knight all arm'd, upon a winged steed,
The same that was bred of Medusaes blood,
On which Dan Perseus, borne of heavenly seed,
The faire Andromeda from perill freed:
Full mortally this knight ywounded was,                              650
That streames of blood foorth flowed on the gras.

Yet was he deckt (small ioy to him, alas!)
With manie garlands for his victories,
And with rich spoyles, which late he did purchas
Through brave atcheivements from his enemies:                        655
Fainting at last through long infirmities,
He smote his steed, that straight to heaven him bore,
And left me here his losse for to deplore.

VI.

Lastly, I saw an Arke of purest golde
Upon a brazen pillour standing hie,                                  660
Which th'ashes seem'd of some great prince to hold,
Enclosde therein for endles memorie
Of him whom all the world did glorifie:
Seemed the heavens with the earth did disagree,
Whether should of those ashes keeper bee.                            665

At last me seem'd wing-footed Mercurie,
From heaven descending to appease their strife,
The arke did beare with him above the skie,
And to those ashes gave a second life,
To live in heaven, where happines is rife:                           670
At which the earth did grieve exceedingly,
And I for dole was almost like to die.

_L'Envoy._

Immortall spirite of Philisides,
Which now art made the heavens ornament,
That whilome wast the worldës chiefst riches.                        675
Give leave to him that lov'de thee to lament
His losse by lacke of thee to heaven hent*,
And with last duties of this broken verse,
Broken with sighes, to decke thy sable herse!
  [* _Hent_, taken away.]

And ye, faire Ladie! th'honor of your daies                          680
And glorie of the world, your high thoughts scorne,
Vouchsafe this moniment of his last praise
With some few silver dropping teares t'adorne;
And as ye be of heavenlie off-spring borne,
So unto heaven let your high minde aspire,                           685
And loath this drosse of sinfull worlds desire.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES:

Ver. 8.--_Verlame._  Veralam, or Verulamium, was a British and Roman
town, near the present city of St. Alban's in Hertfordshire. Some
remains of its walls are still perceptible. H.

Ver. 64.--_Th'Assyrian Lyonesse._   These types of nations are taken
from the seventh chapter of the book of Daniel. H.

Ver. 190.--_I saw him die_. Leicester died at Cornbury Lodge, in
Oxfordshire. Todd suggests that he may have fallen sick at St. Alban's,
and that Spenser, hearing the report in Ireland, may havo concluded
without inquiry that this was the place of his subsequent death, C.

Ver. 225.--_Colin Cloute._ Spenser himself, who had been befriended by
Leicester. H.

Ver. 239.--_His brother._ Ambrose Dudley, Earl of Warwick.

Ver. 245.--_His noble spouse._ Anne, the eldest daughter of Francis
Russell, Earl of Bedford.

Ver. 260.--_His sister_. Lady Mary Sidney.

Ver. 261.--_That good earle_, &c. This Earl of Bedford died in 1585.--
TODD.

Ver. 267.--_He, noble bud_, &c. Edward Russell, grandson of Francis
Earl of Bedford, succeeded in the earldom, his father, Francis, having
been slain by the Scots.--OLDYS.

Ver. 275.--_That goodly ladie_, &c.   Lady Mary Sidney, mother of Sir
Philip Sidney and the Countess of Pembroke.

Ver. 281.--_Most gentle spirite._  Sir Philip Sidney.

Ver. 317.--_Thine owne sister,_ &c. The Countess of Pembroke, to whom
this poem is dedicated. "The Dolefull Lay of Clorinda" (Vol. IV. p.
426) appears to have been written by her.

Ver. 436.--_Good Melibae_. Sir Francis Walsingham, who died April
6,1590. The _poet_ is Thomas Watson.--OLDYS.

Ver. 447-455.--These lines are aimed at Burghley, who was said to have
opposed the Queen's intended bounty to the poet. C.

Ver 491.--These allegorical representations of the vanity of exalted
position, stately buildings, earthly pleasures, bodily strength, and
works of beauty and magnificence, admit of an easy application to the
splendid career of the Earl of Leicester,--his favor and influence with
the Queen, his enlargement of Kenilworth, his princely style of living,
and particularly (IV.) his military command in the Low Countries. The
sixth of these "tragick pageants" strongly confirms this
interpretation. The two bears are Robert and Ambrose Dudley. While
Leicester was lieutenant in the Netherlands, he was in the habit of
using the Warwick crest (a bear and ragged staff) instead of his own.
Naunton, in his Fragmenta Regalia, calls him _Ursa Major_. C.

Ver. 497.--_The holie brethren_, &c. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.
Daniel, ch. iii. C.

Ver. 582-586.--A paraphrase of Sir Philip's last words to his brother.
"Above all, govern your will and affection by the will and word of your
Creator, in me beholding the end of this world with all her vanities."
This is pointed out by Zouch, Life of Sidney, p. 263. C.

Ver 590.--This second series of pageants is applicable exclusively to
Sir Philip Sidney. The meaning of the third and fourth is hard to make
out; but the third seems to have reference to the collection of the
scattered sheets of the Arcadia, and the publication of this work by
the Countess of Pembroke, after it had been condemned to destruction by
the author. The fourth may indeed signify nothing more than Lady
Sidney's bereavement by her husband's death; but this interpretation
seems too literal for a professed allegory. The sixth obviously alludes
to the splendid obsequies to Sidney, performed at the Queen's expense,
and to the competition of the States of Holland for the honor of
burying his body. C.

L'ENVOY: _L'Envoy_ was a sort of postscript _sent with_ poetical
compositions, and serving either to recommend them to the attention of
some particular person, or to enforce what we call the moral of them.--
TYRWHITT.

       *       *       *       *       *



THE TEARES OF THE MUSES.

BY ED. SP.



LONDON:

IMPRINTED FOR WILLIAM PONSONBIE, DWELLING IN PAULES CHURCHYARD AT THE
SIGNE OF THE BISHOPS HEAD.

1591.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE

THE LADIE STRANGE.

Most brave and noble Ladie, the things that make ye so much honored of
the world as ye bee are such as (without my simple lines testimonie)
are throughlie knowen to all men; namely, your excellent beautie, your
vertuous behavior, and your noble match with that most honourable Lord,
the verie paterne of right nobilitie. But the causes for which ye have
thus deserved of me to be honoured, (if honour it be at all,) are, both
your particular bounties, and also some private bands of affinitie*,
which it hath pleased your Ladiship to acknowledge. Of which whenas I
found my selfe in no part worthie, I devised this last slender meanes,
both to intimate my humble affection to your Ladiship, and also to make
the same universallie knowen to the world; that by honouring you they
might know me, and by knowing me they might honor you. Vouchsafe, noble
Lady, to accept this simple remembrance, though not worthy of your
self, yet such as perhaps by good acceptance thereof ye may hereafter
cull out a more meet and memorable evidence of your own excellent
deserts. So recommending the same to your Ladiships good liking, I
humbly take leave.

Your La: humbly ever.

ED. SP.

[Footnote: Lady Strange was Alice Spencer, sixth daughter of Sir John
Spencer of Althorpe. C.]

       *       *       *       *       *


THE TEARES OF THE MUSES.


Rehearse to me, ye sacred Sisters nine,
The golden brood of great Apolloes wit,
Those piteous plaints and sorowfull sad tine
Which late ye powred forth as ye did sit
Beside the silver springs of Helicone,                                 5
Making your musick of hart-breaking mone!

For since the time that Phoebus foolish sonne,
Ythundered, through loves avengefull wrath,
For traversing the charret of the Sunne
Beyond the compasse of his pointed path,                              10
Of you, his mournfull sisters, was lamented,
Such mournfull tunes were never since invented.

Nor since that faire Calliope did lose
Her loved twinnes, the dearlings of her ioy,
Her Palici, whom her unkindly foes,                                   15
The Fatall Sisters, did for spight destroy,
Whom all the Muses did bewaile long space,
Was ever heard such wayling in this place.

For all their groves, which with the heavenly noyses
Of their sweete instruments were wont to sound,                       20
And th'hollow hills, from which their silver voyces
Were wont redoubled echoes to rebound,
Did now rebound with nought but rufull cries,
And yelling shrieks throwne up into the skies.

The trembling streames which wont in chanels cleare                   25
To romble gently downe with murmur soft,
And were by them right tunefull taught to beare
A bases part amongst their consorts oft;
Now forst to overflowe with brackish teares,
With troublous noyse did dull their daintie eares.                    30

The ioyous Nymphes and lightfoote Faëries
Which thether came to heare their musick sweet,
And to the measure of their melodies
Did learne to move their nimble-shifting feete,
Now hearing them so heavily lament,                                   35
Like heavily lamenting from them went.

And all that els was wont to worke delight
Through the divine infusion of their skill,
And all that els seemd faire and fresh in sight,
So made by nature for to serve their will,                            40
Was turned now to dismall heavinesse,
Was turned now to dreadfull uglinesse.

Ay me! what thing on earth, that all thing breeds,
Might be the cause of so impatient plight?
What furie, or what feend, with felon deeds                           45
Hath stirred up so mischievous despight?
Can griefe then enter into heavenly harts,
And pierce immortall breasts with mortall smarts?

Vouchsafe ye then, whom onely it concernes,
To me those secret causes to display;                                 50
For none but you, or who of you it learnes,
Can rightfully aread so dolefull lay.
Begin, thou eldest sister of the crew,
And let the rest in order thee ensew.

CLIO.

Heare, thou great Father of the Gods on hie,                          55
That most art dreaded for thy thunder darts;
And thou, our Syre? that raignst in Castalie
And Mount Parnasse, the god of goodly arts:
Heare, and behold the miserable state
Of us thy daughters, dolefull desolate.                               60

Behold the fowle reproach and open shame
The which is day by day unto us wrought
By such as hate the honour of our name,
The foes of learning and each gentle thought;
They, not contented us themselves to scorne,                          65
Doo seeke to make us of the world forlorne*.
  [* Forlorne, abandoned]

Ne onely they that dwell in lowly dust,
The sonnes of darknes and of ignoraunce;
But they whom thou, great love, by doome uniust
Didst to the type of honour earst advaunce;                           70
They now, puft up with sdeignfull insolence,
Despise the brood of blessed Sapience.

The sectaries* of my celestiall skill,
That wont to be the worlds chiefe ornament,
And learned impes that wont to shoote up still,                       75
And grow to hight of kingdomes government,
They underkeep, and with their spredding armes
Doo beat their buds, that perish through their harmes.
  [* _Sectaries_, followers.]

It most behoves the honorable race
Of mightie peeres true wisedome to sustaine,                          80
And with their noble countenaunce to grace
The learned forheads, without gifts or game:
Or rather learnd themselves behoves to bee;
That is the girlond of nobilitie.

But ah! all otherwise they doo esteeme                                85
Of th'heavenly gift of wisdomes influence,
And to be learned it a base thing deeme:
Base minded they that want intelligence;
For God himselfe for wisedome most is praised,
And men to God thereby are nighest raised.                            90

But they doo onely strive themselves to raise
Through pompous pride, and foolish vanitie;
In th'eyes of people they put all their praise,
And onely boast of armes and auncestrie:
But vertuous deeds, which did those armes first give
To their grandsyres, they care not to atchive.                        96

So I, that doo all noble feates professe
To register and sound in trump of gold,
Through their bad dooings, or base slothfulnesse,
Finde nothing worthie to be writ, or told:                           100
For better farre it were to hide their names,
Than telling them to blazon out their blames.

So shall succeeding ages have no light
Of things forepast, nor moniments of time;
And all that in this world is worthie hight                          105
Shall die in darknesse, and lie hid in slime!
Therefore I mourne with deep harts sorrowing,
Because I nothing noble have to sing.

With that she raynd such store of streaming teares,
That could have made a stonie heart to weep;                         110
And all her sisters rent* their golden heares,
And their faire faces with salt humour steep.
So ended shee: and then the next anew
Began her grievous plaint, as doth ensew.
  [* _Rent_, rend.]

MELPOMENE.

O, who shall powre into my swollen eyes                              115
A sea of teares that never may be dryde,
A brasen voice that may with shrilling cryes
Pierce the dull heavens and fill the ayër wide,
And yron sides that sighing may endure,
To waile the wretchednes of world impure!                            120

Ah, wretched world! the den of wickednesse,
Deformd with filth and fowle iniquitie;
Ah, wretched world! the house of heavinesse,
Fild with the wreaks of mortall miserie;
Ah, wretched world, and all that is therein!                         125
The vassals of Gods wrath, and slaves of sin.

Most miserable creature under sky
Man without understanding doth appeare;
For all this worlds affliction he thereby,
And fortunes freakes, is wisely taught to beare:                     130
Of wretched life the onely ioy shee is.
And th'only comfort in calamities.

She armes the brest with constant patience
Against the bitter throwes of dolours darts:
She solaceth with rules of sapience                                  135
The gentle minds, in midst of worldlie smarts:
When he is sad, shee seeks to make him merie,
And doth refresh his sprights when they be werie.

But he that is of reasons skill bereft,
And wants the staffe of wisedome him to stay,                        140
Is like a ship in midst of tempest left
Withouten helme or pilot her to sway:
Full sad and dreadfull is that ships event;
So is the man that wants intendiment*.
[* _Intendiment_, understanding.]

Whie then doo foolish men so much despize                            145
The precious store of this celestiall riches?
Why doo they banish us, that patronize
The name of learning? Most unhappie wretches!
The which lie drowned in deep wretchednes,
Yet doo not see their owne unhappines.                               150

My part it is and my professed skill
The stage with tragick buskin to adorne,
And fill the scene with plaint and outcries shrill
Of wretched persons, to misfortune borne:
But none more tragick matter I can finde                             155
Than this, of men depriv'd of sense and minde.

For all mans life me seemes a tragedy,
Full of sad sights and sore catastrophees;
First comming to the world with weeping eye,
Where all his dayes, like dolorous trophees,                         160
Are heapt with spoyles of fortune and of feare,
And he at last laid forth on balefull beare.

So all with rufull spectacles is fild,
Fit for Megera or Persephone;
But I that in true tragedies am skild,                               165
The flowre of wit, finde nought to busie me:
Therefore I mourne, and pitifully mone,
Because that mourning matter I have none.

Then gan she wofully to waile, and wring
Her wretched hands in lamentable wise;                               170
And all her sisters, thereto answering,
Threw forth lowd shrieks and drerie dolefull cries.
So rested she: and then the next in rew
Began her grievous plaint, as doth ensew.


THALIA.

Where be the sweete delights of learnings treasure,                  175
That wont with comick sock to beautefie
The painted theaters, and fill with pleasure
The listners eyes, and eares with melodie,
In which I late was wont to raine as queene,
And maske in mirth with graces well beseene?                         180

O, all is gone! and all that goodly glee,
Which wont to be the glorie of gay wits,
Is layd abed, and no where now to see;
And in her roome unseemly Sorrow sits,
With hollow browes and greisly countenaunce                          185
Marring my ioyous gentle dalliaunce.

And him beside sits ugly Barbarisme,
And brutish Ignorance, ycrept of late
Out of dredd darknes of the deep abysme,
Where being bredd, he light and heaven does hate:
They in the mindes of men now tyrannize,                             191
And the faire scene with rudenes foule disguize.

All places they with follie have possest,
And with vaine toyes the vulgare entertaine;
But me have banished, with all the rest                              195
That whilome wont to wait upon my traine,
Fine Counterfesaunce*, and unhurtfull Sport,
Delight, and Laughter, deckt in seemly sort.
  [* _Counterfesaunce_, mimicry.]

All these, and all that els the comick stage
With seasoned wit and goodly pleasance graced,                       200
By which mans life in his likest imáge
Was limned forth, are wholly now defaced;
And those sweete wits which wont the like to frame
Are now despizd, and made a laughing game.

And he, the man whom Nature selfe had made                           205
To mock her selfe, and truth to imitate,
With kindly counter* under mimick shade,
Our pleasant Willy, ah! is dead of late:
With whom all ioy and iolly meriment
Is also deaded, and in dolour drent**.                               210
  [* _Counter_, counterfeit.]
  [** _Drent_, drowned.]

In stead thereof scoffing Scurrilitie,
And scornfull Follie with Contempt is crept,
Rolling in rymes of shameles ribaudrie
Without regard, or due decorum kept;
Each idle wit at will presumes to make*,                             215
And doth the learneds taske upon him take.
  [* _Make_, write poetry.]

But that same gentle spirit, from whose pen
Large streames of honnie and sweete nectar flowe,
Scorning the boldnes of such base-borne men,
Which dare their follies forth so rashlie throwe,                    220
Doth rather choose to sit in idle cell,
Than so himselfe to mockerie to sell.

So am I made the servant of the manie,
And laughing stocke of all that list to scorne,
Not honored nor cared for of anie,                                   225
But loath'd of losels* as a thing forlorne:
Therefore I mourne and sorrow with the rest,
Untill my cause of sorrow be redrest.
  [* _Losels_, worthless fellows.]

Therewith she lowdly did lament and shrike,
Pouring forth streames of teares abundantly;                         230
And all her sisters, with compassion like,
The breaches of her singulfs* did supply.
So rested shee: and then the next in rew
Began her grievous plaint, as doth ensew.
  [* I.e. the pauses of her sighs.]

EUTERPE.

Like as the dearling of the summers pryde,                           235
Faire Philomele, when winters stormie wrath
The goodly fields, that earst so gay were dyde
In colours divers, quite despoyled hath,
All comfortlesse doth hide her chearlesse head
During the time of that her widowhead,                               240

So we, that earst were wont in sweet accord
All places with our pleasant notes to fill,
Whilest favourable times did us afford
Free libertie to chaunt our charmes at will,
All comfortlesse upon the bared bow*,                                245
Like wofull culvers**, doo sit wayling now.
  [* _Bow_, bough.]
  [** _Culvers_, doves.]

For far more bitter storme than winters stowre*
The beautie of the world hath lately wasted,
And those fresh buds, which wont so faire to flowre,
Hath marred quite, and all their blossoms blasted;                   250
And those yong plants, which wont with fruit t'abound,
Now without fruite or leaves are to be found.
  [* _Stowre_, violence.]

A stonie coldnesse hath benumbd the sence
And livelie spirits of each living wight,
And dimd with darknesse their intelligence,                          255
Darknesse more than Cymerians daylie night:
And monstrous Error, flying in the ayre,
Hath mard the face of all that semed fayre.

Image of hellish horrour, Ignorance,
Borne in the bosome of the black abysse,                             260
And fed with Furies milke for sustenaunce
Of his weake infancie, begot amisse
By yawning Sloth on his owne mother Night,--
So hee his sonnes both syre and brother hight,--

He, armd with blindnesse and with boldnes stout,                     265
(For blind is bold,) hath our fayre light defaced;
And, gathering unto him a ragged rout
Of Faunes and Satyres, hath our dwellings raced*,
And our chast bowers, in which all vertue rained,
With brutishnesse and beastlie filth hath stained.                   270
  [* _Raced_, razed.]

The sacred springs of horsefoot Helicon,
So oft bedeawed with our learned layes,
And speaking streames of pure Castalion,
The famous witnesse of our wonted praise,
They trampled have with their fowle footings trade*,
And like to troubled puddles have them made.                         276
  [* _Trade_, tread.]

Our pleasant groves, which planted were with paines,
That with our musick wont so oft to ring,
And arbors sweet, in which the shepheards swaines
Were wont so oft their pastoralls to sing,                           280
They have cut downe, and all their pleasaunce mard,
That now no pastorall is to bee hard.

In stead of them, fowle goblins and shriek-owles
With fearfull howling do all places fill,
And feeble eccho now laments and howles,                             285
The dreadfull accents of their outcries shrill.
So all is turned into wildernesse,
Whilest Ignorance the Muses doth oppresse.

And I, whose ioy was earst with spirit full
To teach the warbling pipe to sound aloft,                           290
My spirits now dismayd with sorrow dull,
Doo mone my miserie in silence soft.
Therefore I mourne and waile incessantly,
Till please the heavens affoord me remedy.

Therewith shee wayled with exceeding woe,                            295
And pitious lamentation did make;
And all her sisters, seeing her doo soe,
With equall plaints her sorrowe did partake.
So rested shee: and then the next in rew
Began her grievous plaint, as doth ensew.                            300


TERPSICHORE.

Whoso hath in the lap of soft delight
Beene long time luld, and fed with pleasures sweet,
Feareles through his own fault or Fortunes spight
To tumble into sorrow and regreet,
Yf chaunce him fall into calamitie,                                  305
Findes greater burthen of his miserie.

So wee, that earst in ioyance did abound,
And in the bosome of all blis did sit,
Like virgin queenes, with laurell garlands cround,
For vertues meed and ornament of wit,                                310
Sith Ignorance our kingdome did confound,
Bee now become most wretched wightes on ground.

And in our royall thrones, which lately stood
In th'hearts of men to rule them carefully,
He now hath placed his accursed brood,                               315
By him begotten of fowle Infamy;
Blind Error, scornefull Follie, and base Spight,
Who hold by wrong that wee should have by right.

They to the vulgar sort now pipe and sing,
And make them merrie with their fooleries;                           320
They cherelie chaunt, and rymes at randon fling,
The fruitfull spawne of their ranke fantasies;
They feede the eares of fooles with flattery,
And good men blame, and losels* magnify.
  [* _Losels_, worthless fellows.]

All places they doo with their toyes possesse,                       325
And raigne in liking of the multitude;
The schooles they till with fond newfanglenesse,
And sway in court with pride and rashnes rude;
Mongst simple shepheards they do boast their skill,
And say their musicke matcheth Phoebus quill.                        330

The noble hearts to pleasures they allure,
And tell their Prince that learning is but vaine;
Faire ladies loves they spot with thoughts impure,
And gentle mindes with lewd delights distaine;
Clerks* they to loathly idlenes entice,                              335
And fill their bookes with discipline of vice.
  [* _Clerks_, scholars.]

So every where they rule and tyrannize,
For their usurped kingdomes maintenaunce,
The whiles we silly maides, whom they dispize
And with reprochfull scorne discountenaunce,                         340
From our owne native heritage exilde,
Walk through the world of every one revilde.

Nor anie one doth care to call us in,
Or once vouchsafeth us to entertaine,
Unlesse some one perhaps of gentle kin,                              345
For pitties sake, compassion our paine,
And yeeld us some reliefe in this distresse;
Yet to be so reliev'd is wretchednesse.

So wander we all carefull comfortlesse,
Yet none cloth care to comfort us at all;                            350
So seeke we helpe our sorrow to redresse,
Yet none vouchsafes to answere to our call;
Therefore we mourne and pittilesse complaine,
Because none living pittieth our paine.

With that she wept and wofullie waymented,                           355
That naught on earth her griefe might pacifie;
And all the rest her dolefull din augmented
With shrikes, and groanes, and grievous agonie.
So ended shee: and then the next in rew
Began her piteous plaint, as doth ensew.                             360

ERATO.

Ye gentle Spirits breathing from above,
Where ye in Venus silver bowre were bred,
Thoughts halfe devine, full of the fire of love,
With beawtie kindled, and with pleasure fed,
Which ye now in securitie possesse,                                  365
Forgetfull of your former heavinesse,--

Now change the tenor of your ioyous layes,
With which ye use your loves to deifie,
And blazon foorth an earthlie beauties praise
Above the compasse of the arched skie:                               370
Now change your praises into piteous cries,
And eulogies turne into elegies.

Such as ye wont, whenas those bitter stounds*
Of raging love first gan you to torment,
And launch your hearts with lamentable wounds                        375
Of secret sorrow and sad languishment,
Before your loves did take you unto grace;
Those now renew, as fitter for this place.
  [* _Stounds_, hours.]

For I that rule in measure moderate
The tempest of that stormie passion,                                 380
And use to paint in rimes the troublous state
Of lovers life in likest fashion,
Am put from practise of my kindlie** skill,
Banisht by those that love with leawdnes fill.
  [* _Kindlie_, natural.]

Love wont to be schoolmaster of my skill,                            385
And the devicefull matter of my song;
Sweete love devoyd of villanie or ill,
But pure and spotles, as at first he sprong
Out of th'Almighties bosome, where he nests;
From thence infused into mortall brests.                             390

Such high conceipt of that celestiall fire,
The base-borne brood of Blindnes cannot gesse,
Ne ever dare their dunghill thoughts aspire
Unto so loftie pitch of perfectnesse,
But rime at riot, and doo rage in love,                              395
Yet little wote what doth thereto behove.

Faire Cytheree, the mother of delight
And queene of beautie, now thou maist go pack;
For lo! thy kingdoms is defaced quight,
Thy scepter rent, and power put to wrack;                            400
And thy gay sonne, that winged God of Love,
May now goe prune his plumes like ruffed* dove.
  [* _Ruffed_, ruffled.]

And ye three twins, to light by Venus brought,
The sweete companions of the Muses late,
From whom whatever thing is goodly thought                           405
Doth borrow grace, the fancie to aggrate*,
Go beg with us, and be companions still,
As heretofore of good, so now of ill.
  [* _Aggrate_, please.]

For neither you nor we shall anie more
Finde entertainment or in court or schoole:                          410
For that which was accounted heretofore
The learneds meed is now lent to the foole;
He sings of love and maketh loving layes,
And they him heare, and they him highly prayse.

With that she powred foorth a brackish flood                         415
Of bitter teares, and made exceeding mone;
And all her sisters, seeing her sad mood,
With lowd laments her answered all at one.
So ended she: and then the next in rew
Began her grievous plaint, as doth ensew.                            420

To whom shall I my evill case complaine,
Or tell the anguish of my inward smart,
Sith none is left to remedie my paine,
Or deignes to pitie a perplexed hart;
But rather seekes my sorrow to augment                               425
With fowle reproach, and cruell banishment?

For they to whom I used to applie
The faithfull service of my learned skill,
The goodly off-spring of loves progenie,
That wont the world with famous acts to fill,                        430
Whose living praises in heroick style,
It is my chiefe profession to compyle,--

They, all corrupted through the rust of time,
That doth all fairest things on earth deface,
Or through unnoble sloth, or sinfull crime,                          435
That doth degenerate the noble race,
Have both desire of worthie deeds forlorne,
And name of learning utterly doo scorne.

Ne doo they care to have the auncestrie
Of th'old heroes memorizde anew;                                     440
Ne doo they care that late posteritie
Should know their names, or speak their praises dew,
But die, forgot from whence at first they sprong,
As they themselves shalbe forgot ere long.

What bootes it then to come from glorious                            445
Forefathers, or to have been nobly bredd?
What oddes twixt Irus and old Inachus,
Twixt best and worst, when both alike are dedd,
If none of neither mention should make,
Nor out of dust their memories awake?                                450

Or who would ever care to doo brave deed,
Or strive in vertue others to excell,
If none should yeeld him his deserved meed,
Due praise, that is the spur of doing well?
For if good were not praised more than ill,                          455
None would choose goodnes of his owne freewill.

Therefore the nurse of vertue I am hight,
And golden trompet of eternitie,
That lowly thoughts lift up to heavens hight,
And mortall men have powre to deifie:                                460
Bacchus and Hercules I raisd to heaven,
And Charlemaine amongst the starris seaven.

But now I will my golden clarion rend,
And will henceforth immortalize no more,
Sith I no more finde worthie to commend                              465
For prize of value, or for learned lore:
For noble peeres, whom I was wont to raise,
Now onely seeke for pleasure, nought for praise.

Their great revenues all in sumptuous pride
They spend, that nought to learning they may spare;
And the rich fee which poets wont divide                             471
Now parasites and sycophants doo share:
Therefore I mourne and endlesse sorrow make,
Both for my selfe and for my sisters sake.

With that she lowdly gan to waile and shrike,                        475
And from her eyes a sea of teares did powre;
And all her sisters, with compassion like,
Did more increase the sharpnes of her showre.
So ended she: and then the next in rew
Began her plaint, as doth herein ensew.                              480

URANIA.

What wrath of gods, or wicked influence
Of starres conspiring wretched men t'afflict,
Hath powrd on earth this noyous pestilence,
That mortall mindes doth inwardly infect
With love of blindnesse and of ignorance,                            485
To dwell in darkenesse without sovenance?*
  [* _Sovenance_, remembrance.]

What difference twixt man and beast is left,
When th'heavenlie light of knowledge is put out,
And th'ornaments of wisdome are bereft?
Then wandreth he in error and in doubt,                              490
Unweeting* of the danger hee is in,
Through fleshes frailtie and deceipt of sin.
  [* _Unweeting_, unknowing.]

In this wide world in which they wretches stray,
It is the onelie comfort which they have,
It is their light, their loadstarre, and their day;                  495
But hell, and darkenesse, and the grislie grave,
Is Ignorance, the enemie of Grace,
That mindes of men borne heavenlie doth debace.

Through knowledge we behold the worlds creation,
How in his cradle first he fostred was;                              500
And iudge of Natures cunning operation,
How things she formed of a formelesse mas:
By knowledge wee do learne our selves to knowe,
And what to man, and what to God, wee owe.

From hence wee mount aloft unto the skie,                            505
And looke into the christall firmament;
There we behold the heavens great hierarchie,
The starres pure light, the spheres swift movëment,
The spirites and intelligences fayre,
And angels waighting on th'Almighties chayre.                        510

And there, with humble minde and high insight,
Th'eternall Makers maiestie wee viewe,
His love, his truth, his glorie, and his might,
And mercie more than mortall men can vew.
O soveraigne Lord, O soveraigne happinesse,                          515
To see thee, and thy mercie measurelesse!

Such happines have they that doo embrace
The precepts of my heavenlie discipline;
But shame and sorrow and accursed case
Have they that scorne the schoole of arts divine,                    520
And banish me, which do professe the skill
To make men heavenly wise through humbled will.

However yet they mee despise and spight,
I feede on sweet contentment of my thought,
And please my selfe with mine owne self-delight,                     525
In contemplation of things heavenlie wrought:
So, loathing earth, I looke up to the sky,
And being driven hence, I thether fly.

Thence I behold the miserie of men,
Which want the blis that wisedom would them breed.
And like brute beasts doo lie in loathsome den                       531
Of ghostly darkenes and of gastlie dreed:
For whom I mourne, and for my selfe complaine,
And for my sisters eake whom they disdaine.

With that shee wept and waild so pityouslie,                         535
As if her eyes had beene two springing wells;
And all the rest, her sorrow to supplie,
Did throw forth shrieks and cries and dreery yells.
So ended shee: and then the next in rew
Began her mournfull plaint, as doth ensew.                           540

POLYHYMNIA.

A dolefull case desires a dolefull song,
Without vaine art or curious complements;
And squallid Fortune, into basenes flong,
Doth scorne the pride of wonted ornaments.
Then fittest are these ragged rimes for mee,                         545
To tell my sorrowes that exceeding bee.

For the sweet numbers and melodious measures
With which I wont the winged words to tie,
And make a tunefull diapase of pleasures,
Now being let to runne at libertie                                   550
By those which have no skill to rule them right,
Have now quite lost their naturall delight.

Heapes of huge words uphoorded hideously,
With horrid sound, though having little sence,
They thinke to be chiefe praise of poetry;                           555
And, thereby wanting due intelligence,
Have mard the face of goodly poesie,
And made a monster of their fantasie.

Whilom in ages past none might professe
But princes and high priests that secret skill;                      560
The sacred lawes therein they wont expresse,
And with deepe oracles their verses fill:
Then was shee held in soveraigne dignitie,
And made the noursling of nobilitie.

But now nor prince nor priest doth her maintayne,
But suffer her prophaned for to bee                                  566
Of the base vulgar, that with hands uncleane
Dares to pollute her hidden mysterie;
And treadeth under foote hir holie things,
Which was the care of kesars* and of kings.                          570
  [* _Kesars_, emperors.]

One onelie lives, her ages ornament,
And myrrour of her Makers maiestie,
That with rich bountie and deare cherishment
Supports the praise of noble poesie;
Ne onelie favours them which it professe,                            575
But is her selfe a peereles poetresse.

Most peereles Prince, most peereles Poetresse,
The true Pandora of all heavenly graces,
Divine Elisa, sacred Emperesse!
Live she for ever, and her royall p'laces                            580
Be fild with praises of divinest wits,
That her eternize with their heavenlie writs!

Some few beside this sacred skill esteme,
Admirers of her glorious excellence;
Which, being lightned with her beawties beme,                        585
Are thereby fild with happie influence,
And lifted up above the worldës gaze,
To sing with angels her immortall praize.

But all the rest, as borne of salvage brood,
And having beene with acorns alwaies fed,                            590
Can no whit savour this celestiall food,
But with base thoughts are into blindnesse led,
And kept from looking on the lightsome day:
For whome I waile and weepe all that I may.

Eftsoones* such store of teares shee forth did powre,
As if shee all to water would have gone;                             596
And all her sisters, seeing her sad stowre**,
Did weep and waile, and made exceeding mone,
And all their learned instruments did breake:
The rest untold no living tongue can speake.                         600
  [* _Eftsoones_, forthwith.]
  [** _Stowre_, disturbance, trouble.]

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES:

Ver 15--_Palici._. The Palici were children of Jupiter and Thalia, not
Calliope. H.

Ver. 205-210.--There are sufficient reasons for believing that these
lines refer to Shakespeare. He had probably written The Two Gentlemen
of Verona, and Love's Labor's Lost, before the Complaints were
published (1591), and no other author had up to this time produced a
comedy that would compare with these. For a discussion of this subject,
see Collier's Life, Chap. VII., and Knight's Biography, pp. 344-348. C.

       *       *       *       *       *



VIRGILS GNAT.

LONG SINCE DEDICATED

TO THE MOST NOBLE AND EXCELLENT LORD,

THE EARLE OF LEICESTER,

LATE DECEASED.

Wrong'd, yet not daring to expresse my paine,
To you, great Lord, the causer of my care,
In clowdie teares my case I thus complaine
Unto your selfe, that onely privie are.
  But if that any Oedipus unware
Shall chaunce, through power of some divining spright,
To reade the secrete of this riddle rare,
And know the purporte of my evill plight,
Let him rest pleased with his owne insight,
Ne further seeke to glose upon the text:
For griefe enough it is to grieved wight
To feele his fault, and not be further vext.

  But what so by my selfe may not be showen,
May by this Gnatts complaint be easily knowen*.

  [* This riddle has never been guessed. Upton conjectures that
Leicester's displeasure was incurred for "some kind of officious
sedulity in Spenser, who much desired to see his patron married to the
Queen." C.]

       *       *       *       *       *


VIRGILS GNAT.


We now have playde, Augustus, wantonly,
Tuning our song unto a tender Muse,
And, like a cobweb weaving slenderly,
Have onely playde: let thus much then excuse
This Gnats small poeme, that th'whole history                          5
Is but a iest; though envie it abuse:
But who such sports and sweet delights doth blame,
Shall lighter seeme than this Gnats idle name.

Hereafter, when as season more secure
Shall bring forth fruit, this Muse shall speak to thee                10
In bigger notes, that may thy sense allure,
And for thy worth frame some fit poesie:
The golden ofspring of Latona pure,
And ornament of great Ioves progenie,
Phoebus, shall be the author of my song,                              15
Playing on yvorie harp with silver strong*.
  [* _Strong_, strung.]

He shall inspire my verse with gentle mood,
Of poets prince, whether he woon* beside
Faire Xanthus sprincled with Chimaeras blood,
Or in the woods of Astery abide,                                      20
Or whereas Mount Parnasse, the Muses brood,
Doth his broad forhead like two hornes divide,
And the sweete waves of sounding Castaly
With liquid foote doth slide downe easily.
  [* _Woon_, dwell.]

Wherefore ye Sisters, which the glorie bee                            25
Of the Pierian streames, fayre Naiades,
Go too, and dauncing all in companie,
Adorne that god: and thou holie Pales,
To whome the honest care of husbandrie
Returneth by continuall successe,                                     30
Have care for to pursue his footing light
Throgh the wide woods and groves with green leaves dight.

Professing thee I lifted am aloft
Betwixt the forrest wide and starrie sky:
And thou, most dread Octavius, which oft                              35
To learned wits givest courage worthily,
O come, thou sacred childe, come sliding soft,
And favour my beginnings graciously:
For not these leaves do sing that dreadfull stound*,
When giants bloud did staine Phlegraean ground;                       40
  [* _Stound_, time.]

Nor how th'halfe-horsy people, Centaures hight,
Fought with the bloudie Lapithaes at bord;
Nor how the East with tyranous despight
Burnt th'Attick towres, and people slew with sword;
Nor how Mount Athos through exceeding might                           45
Was digged downe; nor yron bands abord
The Pontick sea by their huge navy cast,
My volume shall renowne, so long since past.

Nor Hellespont trampled with horses feete,
When flocking Persians did the Greeks affray:                         50
But my soft Muse, as for her power more meete,
Delights (with Phoebus friendly leave) to play
An easie running verse with tender feete.
And thou, dread sacred child, to thee alway
Let everlasting lightsome glory strive,                               55
Through the worlds endles ages to survive.

And let an happie roome remaine for thee
Mongst heavenly ranks, where blessed soules do rest;
And let long lasting life with ioyous glee,
As thy due meede that thou deservest best,                            60
Hereafter many yeares remembred be
Amongst good men, of whom thou oft are blest.
Live thou for ever in all happinesse!
But let us turne to our first businesse.

The fiery Sun was mounted now on Light                                65
Up to the heavenly towers, and shot each where
Out of his golden charet glistering light;
And fayre Aurora, with her rosie heare,
The hatefull darknes now had put to flight;
When as the Shepheard, seeing day appeare,                            70
His little goats gan drive out of their stalls,
To feede abroad, where pasture best befalls.

To an high mountaines top he with them went,
Where thickest grasse did cloath the open hills:
They, now amongst the woods and thickets ment*                        75
Now in the valleies wandring at their wills,
Spread themselves farre abroad through each descent;
Some on the soft greene grasse feeding their fills,
Some, clambring through the hollow cliffes on hy,
Nibble the bushie shrubs which growe thereby.                         80
  [* _Ment_, mingled.]

Others the utmost boughs of trees doe crop,
And brouze the woodbine twigges that freshly bud;
This with full bit* doth catch the utmost top
Of some soft willow, or new growen stud**;
This with sharpe teeth the bramble leaves doth lop,                   85
And chaw the tender prickles in her cud;
The whiles another high doth overlooke
Her owne like image in a christall brooke.
  [* _Bit_, bite.]
  [** _Stud_, stock.]

O the great happines which shepheards have,
Who so loathes not too much the poore estate                          90
With minde that ill use doth before deprave,
Ne measures all things by the costly rate
Of riotise, and semblants outward brave!
No such sad cares, as wont to macerate
And rend the greedie mindes of covetous men,                          95
Do ever creepe into the shepheards den.

Ne cares he if the fleece which him arayes
Be not twice steeped in Assyrian dye;
Ne glistering of golde, which underlayes*
The summer beames, doe blinde his gazing eye;                        100
Ne pictures beautie, nor the glauncing rayes
Of precious stones, whence no good commeth by;
Ne yet his cup embost with imagery
Of Baetus or of Alcons vanity.
  [* _Underlayes_, surpasses.]

Ne ought the whelky* pearles esteemeth hee,                          105
Which are from Indian seas brought far away:
But with pure brest, from carefull sorrow free,
On the soft grasse his limbs doth oft display,
In sweete spring time, when flowres varietie
With sundrie colours paints the sprincled lay**;                     110
There, lying all at ease from guile or spight,
With pype of fennie reedes doth him delight.
  [* _Whelky_, shelly (_conchea_).]
  [** _lay_, lea.]

There he, lord of himselfe, with palme bedight,
His looser locks doth wrap in wreath of vine:
There his milk-dropping goats be his delight,                        115
And fruitefull Pales, and the forrest greene,
And darkesome caves in pleasaunt vallies pight*,
Wheras continuall shade is to be seene,
And where fresh springing wells, as christall neate,
Do alwayes flow, to quench his thirstie heate.                       120
  [* _Pight_, placed.]

O! who can lead then a more happie life
Than he, that with cleane minde and heart sincere,
No greedy riches knowes nor bloudie strife,
No deadly fight of warlick fleete doth feare,
Ne runs in perill of foes cruell knife,                              125
That in the sacred temples he may reare
A trophee of his glittering spoyles and treasure,
Or may abound in riches above measure.

Of him his God is worshipt with his sythe,
And not with skill of craftsman polished:                            130
He ioyes in groves, and makes himselfe full blythe
With sundrie flowers in wilde fieldes gathered,
Ne frankincens he from Panchaea buyth:
Sweete Quiet harbours in his harmeles head,
And perfect Pleasure buildes her ioyous bowre,                       135
Free from sad cares, that rich mens hearts devowre.

This all his care, this all his whole indevour,
To this his minde and senses he doth bend,
How he may flow in quiets matchles treasour,
Content with any food that God doth send;                            140
And how his limbs, resolv'd through idle leisour,
Unto sweete sleepe he may securely lend,
In some coole shadow from the scorching heat,
The whiles his flock their chawed cuds do eate.

O Flocks, O Faunes, and O ye pleasaunt Springs                       145
Of Tempe, where the countrey nymphs are rife,
Through whose not costly care each shepheard sings
As merrie notes upon his rusticke fife
As that Ascraean bard*, whose fame now rings
Through the wide world, and leads as ioyfull life;                   150
Free from all troubles and from worldly toyle,
In which fond men doe all their dayes turmoyle.
  [* I.e. Hesiod]

In such delights whilst thus his carelesse time
This shepheard drives, upleaning on his batt*,
And on shrill reedes chaunting his rustick rime,                     155
Hyperion, throwing foorth his beames full hott,
Into the highest top of heaven gan clime,
And the world parting by an equall lott,
Did shed his whirling flames on either side,
As the great Ocean doth himselfe divide.                             160
  [* _Batt_, stick]

Then gan the shepheard gather into one
His stragling goates, and drave them to a foord,
Whose caerule streame, rombling in pible stone,
Crept under mosse as greene as any goord.
Now had the sun halfe heaven overgone,                               165
When he his heard back from that water foord
Drave, from the force of Phoebus boyling ray,
Into thick shadowes, there themselves to lay.

Soone as he them plac'd in thy sacred wood,
O Delian goddesse, saw, to which of yore                             170
Came the bad daughter of old Cadmus brood,
Cruell Agavè, flying vengeance sore
Of King Nictileus for the guiltie blood
Which she with cursed hands had shed before;
There she halfe frantick, having slaine her sonne,                   175
Did shrowd her selfe like punishment to shonne.

Here also playing on the grassy greene,
Woodgods, and Satyres, and swift Dryades,
With many Fairies oft were dauncing seene.
Not so much did Dan Orpheus represse                                 180
The streames of Hebrus with his songs, I weene,
As that faire troupe of woodie goddesses
Staied thee, O Peneus, powring foorth to thee,
From cheereful lookes, great mirth and gladsome glee.

The verie nature of the place, resounding                            185
With gentle murmure of the breathing ayre,
A pleasant bowre with all delight abounding
In the fresh shadowe did for them prepayre,
To rest their limbs with wearines redounding.
For first the high palme-trees, with braunches faire,
Out of the lowly vallies did arise,                                  191
And high shoote up their heads into the skyes.

And them amongst the wicked lotos grew,
Wicked, for holding guilefully away
Ulysses men, whom rapt with sweetenes new,                           195
Taking to hoste*, it quite from him did stay;
And eke those trees, in whose transformed hew
The Sunnes sad daughters waylde the rash decay
Of Phaëton, whose limbs with lightening rent
They gathering up, with sweete teares did lament.                    200
  [* _Hoste_, entertain.]

And that same tree*, in which Demophoon,
By his disloyalty lamented sore,
Eternall hurte left unto many one:
Whom als accompanied the oke, of yore                                204
Through fatall charmes transferred to such an one:
The oke, whose acornes were our foode before
That Ceres seede of mortall men were knowne,
Which first Triptoleme taught how to be sowne.
  [* I.e. the almond-tree.]

Here also grew the rougher-rinded pine,
The great Argoan ships brave ornament,                               210
Whom golden fleece did make an heavenly signe;
Which coveting, with his high tops extent,
To make the mountaines touch the starres divine,
Decks all the forrest with embellishment;
And the blacke holme that loves the watrie vale;                     215
And the sweete cypresse, signe of deadly bale.

Emongst the rest the clambring yvie grew,
Knitting his wanton armes with grasping hold,
Least that the poplar happely should rew
Her brothers strokes, whose boughes she doth enfold                  220
With her lythe twigs, till they the top survew,
And paint with pallid greene her buds of gold.
Next did the myrtle tree to her approach,
Not yet unmindfull of her olde reproach.

But the small birds in their wide boughs embowring                   225
Chaunted their sundrie tunes with sweete consent;
And under them a silver spring, forth powring
His trickling streames, a gentle murmure sent;
Thereto the frogs, bred in the slimie scowring
Of the moist moores, their iarring voyces bent;                      230
And shrill grashoppers chirped them around:
All which the ayrie echo did resound.

In this so pleasant place the shepheards flocke
Lay everie where, their wearie limbs to rest,
On everie bush, and everie hollow rocke,                             235
Where breathe on them the whistling wind mote best;
The whiles the shepheard self, tending his stocke,
Sate by the fountaine side, in shade to rest,
Where gentle slumbring sleep oppressed him
Displaid on ground, and seized everie lim.                           240

Of trecherie or traines nought tooke he keep,
But, looslie on the grassie greene dispredd,
His dearest life did trust to careles sleep;
Which, weighing down his drouping drowsie hedd,
In quiet rest his molten heart did steep,                            245
Devoid of care, and feare of all falshedd:
Had not inconstant Fortune, bent to ill,
Bid strange mischance his quietnes to spill.

For at his wonted time in that same place
An huge great Serpent, all with speckles pide,                       250
To drench himselfe in moorish slime did trace,
There from the boyling heate himselfe to hide:
He, passing by with rolling wreathed pace,
With brandisht tongue the emptie aire did gride*,
And wrapt his scalie boughts** with fell despight,                   255
That all things seem'd appalled at his sight.
  [* _Gride_, pierce]
  [** _Boughts_, knots]

Now more and more having himselfe enrolde,
His glittering breast he lifteth up on hie,
And with proud vaunt his head aloft doth holde;
His creste above, spotted with purple die,                           260
On everie side did shine like scalie golde;
And his bright eyes, glauncing full dreadfullie,
Did seeme to flame out flakes of flashing fyre,
And with sterne lookes to threaten kindled yre.

Thus wise long time he did himselfe dispace                          265
There round about, when as at last he spide,
Lying along before him in that place,
That flocks grand captaine and most trustie guide:
Eftsoones more fierce in visage and in pace,
Throwing his firie eyes on everie side,                              270
He commeth on, and all things in his way
Full stearnly rends that might his passage stay.

Much he disdaines that anie one should dare
To come unto his haunt; for which intent
He inly burns, and gins straight to prepare                          275
The weapons which Nature to him hath lent;
Fellie he hisseth, and doth fiercely stare,
And hath his iawes with angrie spirits rent,
That all his tract with bloudie drops is stained,
And all his foldes are now in length outstrained.                    280

Whom, thus at point prepared, to prevent,
A litle noursling of the humid ayre,
A Gnat, unto the sleepie shepheard went,
And marking where his ey-lids twinckling rare
Shewd the two pearles which sight unto him lent,                     285
Through their thin coverings appearing fayre
His little needle there infixing deep,
Warnd him awake, from death himselfe to keep.

Wherewith enrag'd, he fiercely gan upstart,
And with his hand him rashly bruzing slewe                           290
As in avengement of his heedles smart,
That streight the spirite out of his senses flew.
And life out of his members did depart:
When, suddenly casting aside his vew,
He spide his foe with felonous intent,                               295
And fervent eyes to his destruction bent.

All suddenly dismaid, and hartles quight,
He fled abacke, and, catching hastie holde
Of a yong alder hard beside him pight,
It rent, and streight about him gan beholde                          300
What god or fortune would assist his might.
But whether god or fortune made him bold
Its hard to read: yet hardie will he had
To overcome, that made him lesse adrad*.
  [* _Adrad_, terrified]

The scalie backe of that most hideous snake                          305
Enwrapped round, oft faining to retire
And oft him to assaile, he fiercely strake
Whereas his temples did his creast front tyre*;
And, for he was but slowe, did slowth off shake,
And, gazing ghastly on, (for feare and yre                           310
Had blent** so much his sense, that lesse he feard,)--
Yet, when he saw him slaine, himselfe he cheard.
  [* _Tyre_, encircle]
  [** _Blent_, blinded]

By this the Night forth from the darksome bowre
Of Herebus her teemed* steedes gan call,
And laesie Vesper in his timely howre                                315
From golden Oeta gan proceede withall;
Whenas the shepheard after this sharpe stowre**,
Seing the doubled shadowes low to fall,
Gathering his straying flocke, does homeward fare,
And unto rest his wearie ioynts prepare.                             320
  [* _Teemed_, harnessed in a team]
  [** _Stowre_, perturbation]

Into whose sense so soone as lighter sleepe
Was entered, and now loosing everie lim,
Sweete slumbring deaw in carelesnesse did steepe,
The image of that Gnat appeard to him,
And in sad tearmes gan sorrowfully weepe,                            325
With grieslie countenaunce and visage grim,
Wailing the wrong which he had done of late,
In steed of good, hastning his cruell fate.

Said he, "What have I wretch deserv'd, that thus
Into this bitter bale I am outcast,                                  330
Whilest that thy life more deare and precious
Was than mine owne, so long as it did last?
I now, in lieu of paines so gracious,
Am tost in th'ayre with everie windie blast:
Thou, safe delivered from sad decay,                                 335
Thy careles limbs in loose sleep dost display.

"So livest thou; but my poore wretched ghost
Is forst to ferrie over Lethes river,
And spoyld of Charon too and fro am tost.
Seest thou not how all places quake and quiver,                      340
Lightned with deadly lamps on everie post?
Tisiphone each where doth shake and shiver
Her flaming fire-brond, encountring me,
Whose lockes uncombed cruell adders be.

"And Cerberus, whose many mouthes doo bay,                           345
And barke out flames, as if on fire he fed,
Adowne whose necke, in terrible array,
Ten thousand snakes, cralling about his hed,
Doo hang in heapes, that horribly affray,
And bloodie eyes doo glister firie red,                              350
He oftentimes me dreadfullie doth threaten
With painfull torments to be sorely beaten.

"Ay me! that thankes so much should faile of meed,
For that I thee restor'd to life againe,
Even from the doore of death and deadlie dreed.                      355
Where then is now the guerdon of my paine?
Where the reward of my so piteous deed?
The praise of pitie vanisht is in vaine,
And th'antique faith of iustice long agone
Out of the land is fled away and gone.                               360

"I saw anothers fate approaching fast,
And left mine owne his safëtie to tender;
Into the same mishap I now am cast,
And shun'd destruction doth destruction render:
Not unto him that never hath trespást,                               365
But punishment is due to the offender:
Yet let destruction be the punishment,
So long as thankfull will may it relent.

"I carried am into waste wildernesse,
Waste wildernes, amongst Cymerian shades,                            370
Where endles paines and hideous heavinesse
Is round about me heapt in darksome glades.
For there huge Othos sits in sad distresse,
Fast bound with serpents that him oft invades,
Far of beholding Ephialtes tide,                                     375
Which once assai'd to burne this world so wide.

"And there is mournfull Tityus, mindefull yet
Of thy displeasure, O Latona faire;
Displeasure too implacable was it,
That made him meat for wild foules of the ayre:                      380
Much do I feare among such fiends to sit;
Much do I feare back to them to repayre,
To the black shadowes of the Stygian shore,
Where wretched ghosts sit wailing evermore.

"There next the utmost brinck doth he abide                          385
That did the bankets of the gods bewray,
Whose throat through thirst to nought nigh being dride,
His sense to seeke for ease turnes every way:
And he that in avengement of his pride,
For scorning to the sacred gods to pray,                             390
Against a mountaine rolls a mightie stone,
Calling in vaine for rest, and can have none.

"Go ye with them, go, cursed damosells,
Whose bridale torches foule Erynnis tynde*,
And Hymen, at your spousalls sad, foretells                          395
Tydings of death and massacre unkinde**:
With them that cruell Colchid mother dwells,
The which conceiv'd in her revengefull minde
With bitter woundes her owne deere babes to slay,
And murdred troupes upon great heapes to lay.                        400
  [* _Tynde_, kindled.]
  [** _Unkinde_, unnatural.]

"There also those two Pandionian maides,
Calling on Itis, Itis evermore,
Whom, wretched boy, they slew with guiltie blades;
For whome the Thracian king lamenting sore,
Turn'd to a lapwing, fowlie them upbraydes,                          405
And flattering round about them still does sore;
There now they all eternally complaine
Of others wrong, and suffer endles paine.

"But the two brethren* borne of Cadmus blood,
Whilst each does for the soveraignty contend,                        411
Blinde through ambition, and with vengeance wood**,
Each doth against the others bodie bend
His cursed steele, of neither well withstood,
And with wide wounds their carcases doth rend;
That yet they both doe mortall foes remaine,                         415
Sith each with brothers bloudie hand was slaine.
  [* I.e. Eteocles and Polynices.]
  [** _Wood_, mad.]

"Ah (waladay!) there is no end of paine,
Nor chaunge of labour may intreated bee:
Yet I beyond all these am carried faine,
Where other powers farre different I see,                            420
And must passe over to th'Elisian plaine:
There grim Persephone, encountring mee,
Doth urge her fellow Furies earnestlie
With their bright firebronds me to terrifie.

"There chast Alceste lives inviolate,                                425
Free from all care, for that her husbands daies
She did prolong by changing fate for fate:
Lo! there lives also the immortall praise
Of womankinde, most faithfull to her mate,
Penelope; and from her farre awayes                                  430
A rulesse* rout of yongmen which her woo'd,
All slaine with darts, lie wallowed in their blood.
  [* _Rulesse_, rule-less.]

"And sad Eurydice thence now no more
Must turne to life, but there detained bee
For looking back, being forbid before:                               435
Yet was the guilt thereof, Orpheus, in thee!
Bold sure he was, and worthie spirite bore,
That durst those lowest shadowes goe to see,
And could beleeve that anie thing could please
Fell Cerberus, or Stygian powres appease.                            440

"Ne feard the burning waves of Phlegeton,
Nor those same mournfull kingdomes, compassed
With rustle horrour and fowle fashion;
And deep digd vawtes*; and Tartar covered
With bloodie night and darke confusion;                              445
And iudgement seates, whose iudge is deadlie dred,
A iudge that after death doth punish sore
The faults which life hath trespassed before.
  [* _Vawtes_, vaults.]

"But valiant fortune made Dan Orpheus bolde:
For the swift running rivers still did stand,                        450
And the wilde beasts their furie did withhold,
To follow Orpheus musicke through the land:
And th'okes, deep grounded in the earthly molde,
Did move, as if they could him understand;                           454
And the shrill woods, which were of sense bereav'd,
Through their hard barke his silver sound receav'd.

"And eke the Moone her hastie steedes did stay,
Drawing in teemes along the starrie skie;
And didst, O monthly Virgin, thou delay
Thy nightly course, to heare his melodie?                            460
The same was able, with like lovely lay,
The Queene of Hell to move as easily
To yeeld Eurydiee unto her fere,
Backe to be borne, though it unlawfull were.

"She, ladie, having well before approoved                            465
The feends to be too cruell and severe,
Observ'd th'appointed way, as her behooved,
Ne ever did her eysight turne arere,
Ne ever spake, ne cause of speaking mooved;
But, cruell Orpheus, thou much crueller,                             470
Seeking to kisse her, brok'st the gods decree,
And thereby mad'st her ever damn'd to be.

"Ah! but sweete love of pardon worthie is,
And doth deserve to have small faults remitted;
If Hell at least things lightly done amis                            475
Knew how to pardon, when ought is omitted:
Yet are ye both received into blis,
And to the seates of happie soules admitted.
And you beside the honourable band
Of great heroës doo in order stand.                                  480

"There be the two stout sonnes of AEacus,
Fierce Peleus, and the hardie Telamon,
Both seeming now full glad and ioyeous
Through their syres dreadfull iurisdiction,
Being the iudge of all that horrid hous:                             488
And both of them, by strange occasion,
Renown'd in choyce of happie marriage
Through Venus grace, and vertues cariage.

"For th'one was ravisht of his owne bondmaide,
The faire Ixione captiv'd from Troy:                                 490
But th'other was with Thetis love assaid,
Great Nereus his daughter and his ioy.
On this side them there is a yongman layd,
Their match in glorie, mightie, fierce, and coy,
That from th'Argolick ships, with furious yre,                       495
Bett back the furie of the Troian fyre.

"O! who would not recount the strong divorces
Of that great warre, which Troianes oft behelde,
And oft beheld the warlike Greekish forces,
When Teucrian soyle with bloodie rivers swelde,                      500
And wide Sigraean shores were spred with corses,
And Simois and Xanthus blood outwelde;
Whilst Hector raged, with outragious minde,
Flames, weapons, wounds, in Greeks fleete to have tynde.

"For Ida selfe, in ayde of that fierce fight,                        505
Out of her mountaines ministred supplies;
And like a kindly nourse did yeeld, for spight,
Store of firebronds out of her nourseries
Unto her foster children, that they might
Inflame the navie of their enemies,                                  510
And all the Rhetaean shore to ashes turne,
Where lay the ships which they did seeke to burne.

"Gainst which the noble sonne of Telamon
Oppos'd himselfe, and thwarting* his huge shield,
Them battell bad; gainst whom appeard anon                           515
Hector, the glorie of the Troian field:
Both fierce and furious in contention
Encountred, that their mightie strokes so shrild
As the great clap of thunder, which doth ryve
The railing heavens and cloudes asunder dryve.                       520
  [* _Thwarting_, interposing.]

"So th'one with fire and weapons did contend
To cut the ships from turning home againe
To Argos; th'other strove for to defend*
The force of Vulcane with his might and maine.
Thus th'one Aeacide did his fame extend:                             525
But th'other ioy'd that, on the Phrygian playne
Having the blood of vanquisht Hector shedd,
He compast Troy thrice with his bodie dedd.
  [* _Defend_, keep off.]

"Againe great dole on either partie grewe,
That him to death unfaithfull Paris sent;                            530
And also him that false Ulysses slewe,
Drawne into danger through close ambushment;
Therefore from him Laërtes sonne his vewe
Doth turn aside, and boasts his good event
In working of Strymonian Rhaesus fall,                               535
And efte* in Dolons slye surprÿsall.
  [* _Efte_, again.]

"Againe the dreadfull Cycones him dismay,
And blacke Laestrigones, a people stout;
Then greedie Scilla, under whom there bay
Manie great bandogs, which her gird about;                           540
Then doo the AEtnean Cyclops him affray,
And deep Charybdis gulphing in and out;
Lastly the squalid lakes of Tartarie,
And griesly feends of hell him terrifie.

"There also goodly Agamemnon bosts,                                  545
The glorie of the stock of Tantalus,
And famous light of all the Greekish hosts;
Under whose conduct most victorious,
The Dorick flames consum'd the Iliack posts.
Ah! but the Greekes themselves, more dolorous,                       550
To thee, O Troy, paid penaunce for thy fall,
In th'Hellespont being nigh drowned all.

"Well may appeare by proofe of their mischaunce
The chaungfull turning of mens slipperie state,
That none whom fortune freely doth advaunce                          555
Himselfe therefore to heaven should elevate:
For loftie type of honour through the glaunce
Of envies dart is downe in dust prostrate,
And all that vaunts in worldly vanitie
Shall fall through fortunes mutabilitie.                             560

"Th'Argolicke power returning home againe,
Enricht with spoyles of th'Ericthonian towre,
Did happie winde and weather entertaine,
And with good speed the fomie billowes scowre:
No signe of storme, no feare of future paine,                        565
Which soone ensued them with heavie stowre*:
Nereïs to the seas a token gave,
The whiles their crooked keeles the surges clave.
  [* _Stowre_, turmoil, uproar.]

"Suddenly, whether through the gods decree,
Or haplesse rising of some froward starre,                           570
The heavens on everie side enclowded bee:
Black stormes and fogs are blowen up from farre,
That now the pylote can no loadstarre see,
But skies and seas doo make most dreadfull warre;
The billowes striving to the heavens to reach,                       575
And th'heavens striving them for to impeach*.
  [* _Impeach_, hinder.]

"And, in avengement of their bold attempt,
Both sun and starres and all the heavenly powres
Conspire in one to wreake their rash contempt,
And downe on them to fall from highest towres:                       580
The skie, in pieces seeming to be rent,
Throwes lightning forth, and haile, and harmful showres,
That death on everie side to them appeares,
In thousand formes, to worke more ghastly feares.

"Some in the greedie flouds are sunke and drent*;                    585
Some on the rocks of Caphareus are throwne;
Some on th'Euboick cliffs in pieces rent;
Some scattred on the Hercaean** shores unknowne;
And manie lost, of whom no moniment
Remaines, nor memorie is to be showne:                               590
Whilst all the purchase@ of the Phrigian pray,
Tost on salt billowes, round about doth stray.
[* _Drent_, drowned.]
[** _Hercaean_ should probably be AEgean.]
[@ _Purchase_, booty.]

"Here manie other like heroës bee,
Equall in honour to the former crue,
Whom ye in goodly seates may placed see,                             595
Descended all from Rome by linage due;
From Rome, that holds the world in sovereigntie,
And doth all nations unto her subdue:
Here Fabii and Decii doo dwell,
Horatii that in vertue did excell.                                   600

"And here the antique fame of stout Camill
Doth ever live; and constant Curtius,
Who, stifly bent his vowed life to spill
For countreyes health, a gulph most hideous
Amidst the towne with his owne corps did fill,                       605
T'appease the Powers; and prudent Mutius,
Who in his flesh endur'd the scorching flame,
To daunt his foe by ensample of the same.

"And here wise Curius, companion
Of noble vertues, lives in endles rest;                              610
And stout Flaminius, whose devotion
Taught him the fires scorn'd furie to detest;
And here the praise of either Scipion
Abides in highest place above the best,
To whom the ruin'd walls of Carthage vow'd,                          615
Trembling their forces, sound their praises lowd.

"Live they for ever through their lasting praise!
But I, poore wretch, am forced to retourne
To the sad lakes that Phoebus sunnie rayes
Doo never see, where soules doo alwaies mourne;                      620
And by the wayling shores to waste my dayes,
Where Phlegeton with quenchles flames doth burne;
By which iust Minos righteous soules doth sever
From wicked ones, to live in blisse for ever.

"Me therefore thus the cruell fiends of hell,                        625
Girt with long snakes and thousand yron chaynes,
Through doome of that their cruell iudge compell,
With bitter torture and impatient paines,
Cause of my death and iust complaint to tell.
For thou art he whom my poore ghost complaines                       630
To be the author of her ill unwares,
That careles hear'st my intollerable cares.

"Them therefore as bequeathing to the winde,
I now depart, returning to thee never,
And leave this lamentable plaint behinde.                            635
But doo thou haunt the soft downe-rolling river,
And wilde greene woods and fruitful pastures minde,
And let the flitting aire my vaine words sever."
Thus having said, he heavily departed
With piteous crie that anie would have smarted.                      640

Now, when the sloathfull fit of lifes sweete rest
Had left the heavie Shepheard, wondrous cares
His inly grieved minde full sore opprest;
That balefull sorrow he no longer beares
For that Gnats death, which deeply was imprest,                      645
But bends what ever power his aged yeares
Him lent, yet being such as through their might
He lately slue his dreadfull foe in fight.

By that same river lurking under greene,
Eftsoones* he gins to fashion forth a place,                         650
And, squaring it in compasse well beseene**,
There plotteth out a tombe by measured space:
His yron-headed spade tho making cleene,
To dig up sods out of the flowrie grasse,
His worke he shortly to good purpose brought,                        655
Like as he had conceiv'd it in his thought.
  [* _Eftsoones_, immediately.]
  [** _Well beseene_, seemly.]

An heape of earth he hoorded up on hie,
Enclosing it with banks on everie side,
And thereupon did raise full busily
A little mount, of greene turffs edifide*;                           660
And on the top of all, that passers by
Might it behold, the toomb he did provide
Of smoothest marble stone in order set,
That never might his luckie scape forget.
  [* _Edifide_, built.]

And round about he taught sweete flowres to growe;                   665
The Rose, engrained in pure scarlet die;
The Lilly fresh, and Violet belowe;
The Marigolde, and cherefull Rosemarie;
The Spartan Mirtle, whence sweet gumb does flowe;
The purple Hyacinths, and fresh Costmarie,                           670
And Saffron, sought for in Cilician soyle,
And Lawrell, th'ornament of Phoebus toyle:

Fresh Rhododaphne, and the Sabine flowre*,
Matching the wealth of th'auncient Frankincence;
And pallid Yvie, building his owne bowre;                            675
And Box, yet mindfull of his olde offence;
Red Amaranthus, lucklesse paramour;
Oxeye still greene, and bitter Patience;
Ne wants there pale Narcisse, that, in a well
Seeing his beautie, in love with it fell.                            680
  [* _Sabine flowre_, a kind of juniper, the savine.]

And whatsoever other flowre of worth,
And whatso other hearb of lovely hew
The ioyous Spring out of the ground brings forth,
To cloath her selfe in colours fresh and new,
He planted there, and reard a mount of earth,                        685
In whose high front was writ as doth ensue:

_To thee, small Gnat, in lieu of his life saved,_
_The Shepheard hath thy deaths record engraved._

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES:

VIRGILS GNAT. This is a very skilful elaboration of the Culex, a poem
attributed, without reason, to Virgil. The original, which is crabbed
and pedantic, where it is not unintelligible from corruption, is here
rendered with sufficient fidelity to the sense, but with such
perspicuity, elegance, and sweetness, as to make Spenser's performance
too good a poem to be called a translation. C.

       *       *       *       *       *



PROSOPOPOIA:

OR
MOTHER HUBBERDS TALE.

BY ED. SP.

DEDICATED TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE,

THE LADIE COMPTON AND MOUNTEGLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

LONDON:

IMPRINTED FOR WILLIAM PONSONBIE, DWELLING IN PAULES
CHURCHYARD AT THE SIGNE OF THE BISHOPS HEAD.

1591.



TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE,

THE LADIE COMPTON AND MOUNTEGLE.[*]

Most faire and vertuous Ladie: having often sought opportunitie by some
good meanes to make knowen to your Ladiship the humble affection and
faithfull duetie which I have alwaies professed, and am bound to beare,
to that house from whence yee spring, I have at length found occasion
to remember the same by making a simple present to you of these my idle
labours; which having long sithens composed in the raw conceipt of my
youth, I lately amongst other papers lighted upon, and was by others,
which liked the same, mooved to set them foorth. Simple is the device,
and the composition meane, yet carrieth some delight, even the rather
because of the simplicitie and meannesse thus personated. The same I
beseech your Ladiship take in good part, as a pledge of that profession
which I have made to you, and keepe with you untill with some other
more worthie labour redeeme it out of your hands, and discharge my
utmost dutie. Till then, wishing your Ladiship all increase of honour
and happinesse, I humblie take
leave.

Your La: ever
    humbly,
        ED. SP.

[* "This lady was Anne, the fifth daughter of Sir John
Spencer, distinguished also, in the pastoral of _Colin Clouts come Home
again_, by the name of _Charillis_. She was married, first to Sir
William Stanley, Lord Mountegle; next to Henry Compton, Lord Compton;
and lastly to Robert Sackvilie, Lord Buckhurst, afterwards Earl of
Dorset."--TODD.]

       *       *       *       *       *


PROSOPOPOIA:

OR

MOTHER HUBBERDS TALE.


It was the month in which the righteous Maide
That for disdaine of sinfull worlds upbraide
Fled back to heaven, whence she was first conceived,
Into her silver bowre the Sunne received;
And the hot Syrian Dog on him awayting,                                5
After the chafed Lyons cruell bayting,
Corrupted had th'ayre with his noysome breath.
And powr'd on th'earth plague, pestilence, and death.
Emongst the rest a wicked maladie
Raign'd emongst men, that manie did to die,                           10
Depriv'd of sense and ordinarie reason;
That it to leaches seemed strange and geason.
     [_Geason_, rare.]
My fortune was, mongst manie others moe,
To be partaker of their common woe;
And my weake bodie, set on fire with griefe,                          15
Was rob'd of rest and naturall reliefe.
In this ill plight, there came to visite mee
Some friends, who, sorie my sad case to see,
Began to comfort me in chearfull wise,
And meanes of gladsome solace to devise.                              20
But seeing kindly sleep refuse to doe
His office, and my feeble eyes forgoe,
They sought my troubled sense how to deceave
With talke that might unquiet fancies reave;
     [_Reave_, take away.]
And sitting all in seates about me round,                             25
With pleasant tales fit for that idle stound
     [_Stound_, time.]
They cast in course to waste the wearie howres.
Some tolde of ladies, and their paramoures;
Some of brave knights, and their renowned squires;
Some of the faeries and their strange attires;                        30
And some of giaunts hard to be beleeved;
That the delight thereof me much releeved.
Amongst the rest a good old woman was,
Hight Mother Hubberd, who did farre surpas
The rest in honest mirth, that seem'd her well.                       35
She, when her turne was come her tale to tell,
Tolde of a strange adventure that betided
Betwixt the Foxe and th'Ape by him misguided;
The which, for that my sense it greatly pleased,
All were my spirite heavie and diseased,                              40
Ile write in termes, as she the same did say,
So well as I her words remember may.
No Muses aide me needes heretoo to call;
Base is the style, and matter meane withall.
     [_Base_, humble.]

[Symbol: Paragraph mark to indicate beginning of story.]
Whilome, said she, before the world was civill,
The Foxe and th'Ape, disliking of their evill                         46
And hard estate, determined to seeke
Their fortunes farre abroad, lyeke with his lyeke:
For both were craftie and unhappie witted;
     [_Unhappie_, mischievous.]
Two fellowes might no where be better fitted.                         50
The Foxe, that first this cause of griefe did finde,
Gan first thus plaine his case with words unkinde:
"Neighbour Ape, and my gossip eke beside,
(Both two sure bands in friendship to be tide,)
To whom may I more trustely complaine                                 55
The evill plight that doth me sore constraine,
And hope thereof to finde due remedie?
Heare then my paine and inward agonie.
Thus manie yeares I now have spent and worne,
In meane regard, and basest fortunes scorne,                          60
Dooing my countrey service as I might,
No lesse I dare saie than the prowdest wight;
And still I hoped to be up advaunced
For my good parts; but still it hath mischaunced.
Now therefore that no lenger hope I see,                              65
But froward fortune still to follow mee,
And losels lifted up on high, where I did looke,
     [_Losels_, worthless fellows.]
I meane to turne the next leafe of the booke.
Yet ere that anie way I doe betake,
I meane my gossip privie first to make."                              70
"Ah! my deare gossip," answer'd then the Ape,
"Deeply doo your sad words my wits awhape,
     [_Awhape_, astound.]
Both for because your griefe doth great appeare,
And eke because my selfe am touched neare:
For I likewise have wasted much good time,                            75
Still wayting to preferment up to clime,
Whilst others alwayes have before me stept,
And from my beard the fat away have swept;
That now unto despaire I gin to growe,
And meane for better winde about to throwe.                           80
Therefore to me, my trustie friend, aread
     [_Aread_, declare.]
Thy councell: two is better than one head."
"Certes," said he, "I meane me to disguize
In some straunge habit, after uncouth wize,
Or like a pilgrime, or a lymiter,                                     85
     [_Lymiter_, I.e. a friar licensed to beg within a certain
district.]
Or like a gipsen, or a iuggeler,
     [_Gipsen_, gypsy.]
And so to wander to the worlds ende,
To seeke my fortune, where I may it mend:
For worse than that I have I cannot meete.
Wide is the world I wote, and everie streete                          90
Is full of fortunes and adventures straunge,
Continuallie subiect unto chaunge.
Say, my faire brother now, if this device
Doth like you, or may you to like entice."
"Surely," said th'Ape, "it likes me wondrous well;                    95
And would ye not poore fellowship expell,
My selfe would offer you t'accompanie
In this adventures chauncefull ieopardie.
For to wexe olde at home in idlenesse
Is disadventrous, and quite fortunelesse:                            100
Abroad, where change is, good may gotten bee."
The Foxe was glad, and quickly did agree:
So both resolv'd, the morrow next ensuing,
So soone as day appeard to peoples vewing,
On their intended iourney to proceede;                               105
And over night, whatso theretoo did neede
Each did prepare, in readines to bee.
The morrow next, so soone as one might see
Light out of heavens windowes forth to looke,
Both their habiliments unto them tooke,                              110
And put themselves, a Gods name, on their way.
Whenas the Ape, beginning well to wey
This hard adventure, thus began t'advise:
"Now read, Sir Reynold, as ye be right wise,
What course ye weene is best for us to take,                         115
That for our selves we may a living make.
Whether shall we professe some trade or skill?
Or shall we varie our device at will,
Even as new occasion appeares?
Or shall we tie our selves for certaine yeares                       120
To anie service, or to anie place?
For it behoves, ere that into the race
We enter, to resolve first hereupon."
"Now surely, brother," said the Foxe anon,
"Te have this matter motioned in season:                             125
For everie thing that is begun with reason
Will come by readie meanes unto his end;
But things miscounselled must needs miswend.
     [_Miswend_, go wrong.]
Thus therefore I advize upon the case:
That not to anie certaine trade or place,                            130
Nor anie man, we should our selves applie.
For why should he that is at libertie
Make himselfe bond? Sith then we are free borne.
Let us all servile base subiection scorne;
And as we bee sonnes of the world so wide,                           135
Let us our fathers heritage divide,
And chalenge to our selves our portions dew
Of all the patrimonie, which a few
Now hold in hugger mugger in their hand,
     [_In hugger mugger_, in secret]
And all the rest doo rob of good and land:                           140
For now a few have all, and all have nought,
Yet all be brethren ylike dearly bought.
There is no right in this partition,
Ne was it so by institution
Ordained first, ne by the law of Nature,                             145
But that she gave like blessing to each creture
As well of worldly livelode as of life,
That there might be no difference nor strife,
Nor ought cald mine or thine: thrice happie then
Was the condition of mortall men.                                    150
That was the golden age of Saturne old,
But this might better be the world of gold;
For without golde now nothing wilbe got.
Therefore, if please you, this shalbe our plot:
We will not be of anie occupation;                                   155
Let such vile vassalls, borne to base vocation,
Drudge in the world and for their living droyle,
     [_Droyle_, moil]
Which have no wit to live withouten toyle.
But we will walke about the world at pleasure,
Like two free men, and make our ease our treasure.
Free men some beggers call; but they be free;                        161
And they which call them so more beggers bee:
For they doo swinke and sweate to feed the other,
     [_Swinke_, toil.]
Who live like lords of that which they doo gather,
And yet doo never thanke them for the same,                          165
But as their due by nature doo it clame.
Such will we fashion both our selves to bee,
Lords of the world; and so will wander free
Where so us listeth, uncontrol'd of anie.
Hard is our hap, if we, emongst so manie,                            170
Light not on some that may our state amend;
Sildome but some good commeth ere the end."
Well seemd the Ape to like this ordinaunce:
Yet, well considering of the circumstaunce,
As pausing in great doubt awhile he staid,                           175
And afterwards with grave advizement said:
"I cannot, my lief brother, like but well
     [_Lief_, dear.]
The purpose of the complot which ye tell;
For well I wot (compar'd to all the rest
Of each degree) that beggers life is best,                           180
And they that thinke themselves the best of all
Oft-times to begging are content to fall.
But this I wot withall, that we shall ronne
Into great daunger, like to bee undonne,
Thus wildly to wander in the worlds eye,                             185
Withouten pasport or good warrantye,
For feare least we like rogues should be reputed,
And for eare-marked beasts abroad be bruted.
Therefore I read that we our counsells call
How to prevent this mischiefe ere it fall,                           190
And how we may, with most securitie,
Beg amongst those that beggars doo defie."
"Right well, deere gossip, ye advized have,"
Said then the Foxe, "but I this doubt will save:
For ere we farther passe, I will devise                              195
A pasport for us both in fittest wize,
And by the names of souldiers us protect,
That now is thought a civile begging sect.
Be you the souldier, for you likest are
For manly semblance, and small skill in warre:                       200
I will but wayte on you, and, as occasion
Falls out, my selfe fit for the same will fashion."
The pasport ended, both they forward went;
The Ape clad souldierlike, fit for th'intent,
In a blew iacket with a crosse of redd                               205
And manie slits, as if that he had shedd
Much blood throgh many wounds therein receaved,
Which had the use of his right arme bereaved,
Upon his head an old Scotch cap he wore,
With a plume feather all to peeces tore;                             210
His breeches were made after the new cut,
_Al Portugese_, loose like an emptie gut,
And his hose broken high above the heeling,
And his shooes beaten out with traveling.
But neither sword nor dagger he did beare;                           215
Seemes that no foes revengement he did feare;
In stead of them a handsome bat he held,
     [_Bat_, stick.]
On which he leaned, as one farre in elde.
     [_Elde_, age.]
Shame light on him, that through so false illusion
Doth turne the name of souldiers to abusion,                         220
And that which is the noblest mysterie
     [_Mysterie_, profession.]
Brings to reproach and common infamie!
Long they thus travailed, yet never met
Adventure which might them a working set:
Yet manie waies they sought, and manie tryed;                        225
Yet for their purposes none fit espyed.
At last they chaunst to meete upon the way
A simple husbandman in garments gray;
Yet, though his vesture were but meane and bace,
     [_Bace_, humble.]
A good yeoman he was of honest place,                                230
And more for thrift did care than for gay clothing:
Gay without good is good hearts greatest loathing.
The Foxe, him spying, bad the Ape him dight
     [_Dight_, prepare.]
To play his part, for loe! he was in sight
That, if he er'd not, should them entertaine,                        235
And yeeld them timely profite for their paine.
Eftsoones the Ape himselfe gan up to reare,
     [_Eftsoones_, straightway.]
And on his shoulders high his bat to beare,
As if good service he were fit to doo,
But little thrift for him he did it too:                             240
And stoutly forward he his steps did straine,
That like a handsome swaine it him became.
When as they nigh approached, that good man,
Seeing them wander loosly, first began
T'enquire, of custome, what and whence they were.
To whom the Ape: "I am a souldiere,                                  246
That late in warres have spent my deerest blood,
And in long service lost both limbs and good;
And now, constraint that trade to overgive,
I driven am to seeke some meanes to live:                            250
Which might it you in pitie please t'afford,
I would be readie, both in deed and word,
To doo you faithfull service all my dayes.
This yron world" (that same he weeping sayes)
"Brings downe the stowtest hearts to lowest state:                   255
For miserie doth bravest mindes abate,
And make them seeke for that they wont to scorne,
Of fortune and of hope at once forlorne."
     [_Forlorne_, deserted.]
The honest roan that heard him thus complaine
Was griev'd as he had felt part of his paine;                        260
And, well dispos'd him some reliefe to showe,
Askt if in husbandrie he ought did knowe,--
To plough, to plant, to reap, to rake, to sowe,
To hedge, to ditch, to thrash, to thetch, to mowe;
Or to what labour els he was prepar'd:                               265
For husbands life is labourous and hard.
     [_Husbands_, husbandman's.]
Whenas the Ape him hard so much to talke
Of labour, that did from his liking balke,
He would have slipt the coller handsomly,
And to him said: "Good Sir, full glad am I                           270
To take what paines may anie living wight:
But my late maymed limbs lack wonted might
To doo their kindly services, as needeth:
     [_Kindly_, natural.]
Scarce this right hand the mouth with diet feedeth;
So that it may no painfull worke endure,                             275
Ne to strong labour can it selfe enure.
But if that anie other place you have,
Which askes small paines, but thriftines to save,
Or care to overlooke, or trust to gather,
Ye may me trust as your owne ghostly father."                        280
With that the husbandman gan him avize,
That it for him were fittest exercise
Cattell to keep, or grounds to oversee;
And asked him, if he could willing bee
To keep his sheep, or to attend his swyne,                           285
Or watch his mares, or take his charge of kyne.
"Gladly," said he, "what ever such like paine
Ye put on me, I will the same sustaine:
But gladliest I of your fleecie sheepe
(Might it you please) would take on me the keep.                     290
For ere that unto armes I me betooke,
Unto my fathers sheepe I usde to looke,
That yet the skill thereof I have not loste:
Thereto right well this curdog, by my coste,
(Meaning the Foxe,) will serve my sheepe to gather,
And drive to follow after their belwether."                          295
The husbandman was meanly well content
     [_Meanly_, humbly.]
Triall to make of his endevourment;
And, home him leading, lent to him the charge
Of all his flocke, with libertie full large,                         300
Giving accompt of th'annuall increce
Both of their lambes, and of their woolly fleece.
Thus is this Ape become a shepheard swaine,
And the false Foxe his dog: God give them paine!
For ere the yeare have halfe his course out-run,                     305
And doo returne from whence he first begun,
They shall him make an ill accompt of thrift.
Now whenas time, flying with wingës swift,
Expired had the terme that these two iavels
     [_Iavels,_ worthless fellows.]
Should render up a reckning of their travels                         310
Unto their master, which it of them sought,
Exceedingly they troubled were in thought,
Ne wist what answere unto him to frame,
Ne how to scape great punishment, or shame,
For their false treason and vile theeverie:                          315
For not a lambe of all their flockes-supply
Had they to shew; but ever as they bred,
They slue them, and upon their fleshes fed:
For that disguised dog lov'd blood to spill,
And drew the wicked shepheard to his will.                           320
So twixt them both they not a lambkin left;
And when lambes fail'd, the old sheepes lives they reft;
That how t'acquite themselves unto their lord
They were in doubt, and flatly set abord.
     [_Set abord_, set adrift, at a loss.]
The Foxe then counsel'd th'Ape for to require                        325
Respite till morrow t'answere his desire:
For times delay new hope of helpe still breeds.
The good man granted, doubting nought their deeds,
And bad next day that all should readie be.
But they more subtill meaning had than he:                           330
For the next morrowes meed they closely ment,
     [_Closely_, secretly.]
For feare of afterclaps, for to prevent:
     [_Prevent_, anticipate.]
And that same evening, when all shrowded were
In careles sleep, they without care or feare
Cruelly fell upon their flock in folde,                              335
And of them slew at pleasure what they wolde.
Of which whenas they feasted had their fill,
For a full complement of all their ill,
They stole away, and tooke their hastie flight,
Carried in clowdes of all-concealing night.                          340
So was the husbandman left to his losse,
And they unto their fortunes change to tosse.
After which sort they wandered long while,
Abusing manie through their cloaked guile;
That at the last they gan to be descryed                             345
Of everie one, and all their sleights espyed;
So as their begging now them failed quyte,
For none would give, but all men would them wyte.
     [_Wyte_, blame.]
Yet would they take no paines to get their living,
But seeke some other way to gaine by giving,                         350
Much like to begging, but much better named;
For manie beg which are thereof ashamed.
And now the Foxe had gotten him a gowne,
And th'Ape a cassocke sidelong hanging downe;
For they their occupation meant to change,                           355
And now in other state abroad to range:
For since their souldiers pas no better spedd,
They forg'd another, as for clerkes booke-redd.
Who passing foorth, as their adventures fell,
Through manie haps, which needs not here to tell,                    360
At length chaunst with a formall Priest to meete,
     [_Formall_, regular.]
Whom they in civill manner first did greete,
And after askt an almes for Gods deare love.
The man straightway his choler up did move,
And with reproachfull tearmes gan them revile,                       365
For following that trade so base and vile;
And askt what license or what pas they had.
"Ah!" said the Ape, as sighing wondrous sad,
"Its an hard case, when men of good deserving
Must either driven be perforce to sterving,                          370
Or asked for their pas by everie squib,
     [_Squib_, flashy, pretentious fellow]
That list at will them to revile or snib.
     [_Snib_, snub]
And yet (God wote) small oddes I often see
Twixt them that aske, and them that asked bee.
Natheles because you shall not us misdeeme,                          375
But that we are as honest as we seeme,
Yee shall our pasport at your pleasure see,
And then ye will (I hope) well mooved bee."
Which when the Priest beheld, he vew'd it nere,
As if therein some text he studying were,                            380
But little els (God wote) could thereof skill:
     [_Skill_, understand.]
For read he could not evidence nor will,
Ne tell a written word, ne write a letter,
Ne make one title worse, ne make one better.
Of such deep learning little had he neede,                           385
Ne yet of Latine ne of Greeke, that breede
Doubts mongst divines, and difference of texts,
From whence arise diversitie of sects,
And hatefull heresies, of God abhor'd.
But this good Sir did follow the plaine word,                        390
Ne medled with their controversies vaine;
All his care was his service well to saine,
     [_Saine_, say.]
And to read homelies upon holidayes;
When that was done, he might attend his playes:
An easie life, and fit high God to please.                           395
He, having overlookt their pas at ease,
Gan at the length them to rebuke againe,
That no good trade of life did entertaine,
But lost their time in wandring loose abroad;
Seeing the world, in which they bootles boad,                        400
     [_Bootless boad_, dwelt unprofitably.]
Had wayes enough for all therein to live;
Such grace did God unto his creatures give.
Said then the Foxe: "Who hath the world not tride
From the right way full eath may wander wide.
     [_Eath_, easy.]
We are but novices, new come abroad,                                 405
We have not yet the tract of anie troad,
     [I.e. routine of any way of life.]
Nor on us taken anie state of life,
But readie are of anie to make preife.
     [_Preife_, proof.]
Therefore might please you, which the world have proved,
Us to advise, which forth but lately moved,                          410
Of some good course that we might undertake,
Ye shall for ever us your bondmen make."
The priest gan wexe halfe proud to be so praide,
And thereby willing to affoord them aide,
"It seemes," said he, "right well that ye be clerks,                 415
Both by your wittie words and by your works.
Is not that name enough to make a living
To him that hath a whit of Natures giving?
How manie honest men see ye arize
Daylie thereby, and grow to goodly prize;                            420
To deanes, to archdeacons, to commissaries,
To lords, to principalls, to prebendaries?
All iolly prelates, worthie rule to beare,
Who ever them envie: yet spite bites neare.
Why should ye doubt, then, but that ye likewise                      425
Might unto some of those in time arise?
In the meane time to live in good estate,
Loving that love, and hating those that hate;
Being some honest curate, or some vicker,
Content with little in condition sicker."                            430
     [_Sicker_, sure.]
"Ah! but," said th'Ape, "the charge is wondrous great,
To feed mens soules, and hath an heavie threat."
"To feede mens soules," quoth he, "is not in man:
For they must feed themselves, doo what we can.
We are but charg'd to lay the meate before:                          435
Eate they that list, we need to doo no more.
But God it is that feedes them with his grace,
The bread of life powr'd downe from heavenly place.
Therefore said he that with the budding rod
Did rule the lewes, _All shalbe taught of God._                      440
That same hath Iesus Christ now to him raught,
     [_Raught_, reached, taken.]
By whom the flock is rightly fed and taught:
He is the shcpheard, and the priest is hee;
We but his shepheard swaines ordain'd to bee.
Therefore herewith doo not your selfe dismay;                        445
Ne is the paines so great, but beare ye may;
For not so great, as it was wont of yore,
It's now a dayes, ne halfe so streight and sore.
They whilome used duly everie day
Their service and their holie things to say,                         450
At morne and even, beside their anthemes sweete,
Their penie masses, and their complynes meete,
     [_Complynes_, even-song; the last service of the day.]
Their diriges, their trentals, and their shrifts,
     [_Trentals_, thirty masses for the dead.]
Their memories, their singings, and their gifts.
     [_Memories_, services for the dead.]
Now all those needlesse works are laid away;                         455
Now once a weeke, upon the Sabbath day,
It is enough to doo our small devotion,
And then to follow any merrie motion.
Ne are we tyde to fast, but when we list;
Ne to weare garments base of wollen twist,                           460
But with the finest silkes us to aray,
That before God we may appeare more gay,
Resembling Aarons glorie in his place:
For farre unfit it is, that person bace
Should with vile cloaths approach Gods maiestie,                     465
Whom no uncleannes may approachen nie;
Or that all men, which anie master serve,
Good garments for their service should deserve,
But he that serves the Lord of Hoasts Most High,
And that in highest place, t'approach him nigh,                      470
And all the peoples prayers to present
Before his throne, as on ambassage sent
Both too and fro, should not deserve to weare
A garment better than of wooll or heare.
Beside, we may have lying by our sides                               475
Our lovely lasses, or bright shining brides;
We be not tyde to wilfull chastitie,
But have the gospell of free libertie."
By that he ended had his ghostly sermon,
The Foxe was well induc'd to be a parson;                            480
And of the priest eftsoones gan to enquire
How to a benefice he might aspire.
"Marie, there," said the priest, "is arte indeed:
Much good deep learning one thereout may reed;
For that the ground-worke is, and end of all,                        485
How to obtaine a beneficiall.
First, therefore, when ye have in handsome wise
Your selfe attyred, as you can devise,
Then to some nobleman your selfe applye,
Or other great one in the worldës eye,                               490
That hath a zealous disposition
To God, and so to his religion.
There must thou fashion eke a godly zeale,
Such as no carpers may contrayre reveale:
For each thing fained ought more warie bee.                          495
There thou must walke in sober gravitee,
And seeme as saintlike as Saint Radegund:
Fast much, pray oft, looke lowly on the ground,
And unto everie one doo curtesie meeke:
These lookes (nought saying) doo a benefice seeke,
And be thou sure one not to lacke or long.                           501
     [_Or_, ere.]
But if thee list unto the Court to throng,
And there to hunt after the hoped pray,
Then must thou thee dispose another way
For there thou needs must learne to laugh, to lie,                   505
To face, to forge, to scoffe, to companie,
To crouche, to please, to be a beetle-stock
Of thy great masters will, to scorne, or mock:
So maist thou chaunce mock out a benefice,
Unlesse thou canst one coniure by device,                            510
Or cast a figure for a bishoprick:
And if one could, it were but a schoole trick.
These be the wayes by which without reward
Livings in court he gotten, though full hard;
For nothing there is done without a fee:                             515
The courtier needes must recompenced bee
With a benevolence, or have in gage
     [_Gage_, pledge.]
The primitias of your parsonage:
     [_Primitias_, first-fruits.]
Scarse can a bishoprick forpas them by,
But that it must be gelt in privitie.                                520
Doo not thou therefore seeke a living there,
But of more private persons seeke elswhere,
Whereas thou maist compound a better penie,
Ne let thy learning question'd be of anie.
For some good gentleman, that hath the right                         525
Unto his church for to present a wight,
Will cope with thee in reasonable wise,
     [_Cope_, bargain.]
That if the living yerely doo arise
To fortie pound, that then his yongest sonne
Shall twentie have, and twentie thou hast wonne:                     530
Thou hast it wonne, for it is of franke gift
And he will care for all the rest to shift;
Both that the bishop may admit of thee,
And that therein thou maist maintained bee.
This is the way for one that is unlern'd                             535
Living to get, and not to be discern'd.
But they that are great clerkes have nearer wayes
For learning sake to living them to raise:
Yet manie eke of them (God wote) are driven
T'accept a benefice in peeces riven.--                               540
How saist thou, friend, have I not well discourst
Upon this common-place, though plaine, not wourst?
Better a short tale than a bad long shriving:
Needes anie more to learne to get a living?"
"Now sure, and by my hallidome," quoth he                            545
"Yea great master are in your degree:
Great thankes I yeeld you for your discipline,
And doo not doubt but duly to encline
My wits theretoo, as ye shall shortly heare."
The priest him wisht good speed and well to fare:                    550
So parted they, as eithers way them led.
But th'Ape and Foxe ere long so well them sped,
Through the priests holesome counsell lately tought,
And throgh their owne faire handling wisely wroght,
That they a benefice twixt them obtained,                            555
And craftie Reynold was a priest ordained,
And th'Ape his parish clarke procur'd to bee:
Then made they revell route and goodly glee.
But, ere long time had passed, they so ill
Did order their affaires, that th'evill will                         560
Of all their parishners they had constraind;
Who to the ordinarie of them complain'd,
How fowlie they their offices abusd,
And them of crimes and heresies accusd;
That pursivants he often for them sent.                              565
But they neglected his commaundëment;
So long persisted obstinate and bolde,
Till at the length he published to holde
A visitation, and them cyted thether.
Then was high time their wits about to geather;                      570
What did they then, but made a composition
With their next neighbor priest for light condition,
To whom their living they resigned quight
For a few pence, and ran away by night.
So passing through the countrey in disguize,                         575
They fled farre off, where none might them surprize,
And after that long straied here and there,
Through everie field and forrest farre and nere;
Yet never found occasion for their tourne,
But, almost sterv'd, did much lament and mourne.                     580
At last they chaunst to meete upon the way
The Mule, all deckt in goodly rich aray,
With bells and bosses that full lowdly rung,
And costly trappings that to ground downe hung.
Lowly they him saluted in meeke wise;                                585
But he through pride and fatnes gan despise
Their meanesse; scarce vouchsafte them to requite.
Whereat the Foxe deep groning in his sprite,
Said: "Ah! Sir Mule, now blessed be the day
That I see you so goodly and so gay                                  590
In your attyres, and eke your silken hyde
Fil'd with round flesh, that everie bone doth hide.
Seemes that in fruitfull pastures ye doo live,
Or fortune doth you secret favour give."
"Foolish Foxe!" said the Mule, "thy wretched need
Praiseth the thing that doth thy sorrow breed.                       596
For well I weene thou canst not but envie
My wealth, compar'd to thine owne miserie,
That art so leane and meagre waxen late
That scarse thy legs uphold thy feeble gate."                        600
"Ay me!" said then the Foxe, "whom evill hap
Unworthy in such wretchednes doth wrap,
And makes the scorne of other beasts to bee.
But read, faire Sir, of grace, from whence come yee;
Or what of tidings you abroad doo heare;                             605
Newes may perhaps some good unweeting beare."
"From royall court I lately came," said he,
"Where all the braverie that eye may see,
And all the happinesse that heart desire,
Is to be found; he nothing can admire,                               610
That hath not seene that heavens portracture.
But tidings there is none, I you assure,
Save that which common is, and knowne to all,
That courtiers as the tide doo rise and fall."
"But tell us," said the Ape, "we doo you pray,                       615
Who now in court doth beare the greatest sway:
That, if such fortune doo to us befall,
We may seeke favour of the best of all."
"Marie," said he, "the highest now in grace,
Be the wilde beasts, that swiftest are in chase;                     620
For in their speedie course and nimble flight
The Lyon now doth take the most delight:
But chieflie ioyes on foote them to beholde,
Enchaste with chaine and circulet of golde:
     [_Enchaste_, adorned.]
So wilde a beaste so tame ytaught to bee,                            625
And buxome to his bands, is ioy to see;
     [_Buxome_, obedient.]
So well his golden circlet him beseemeth.
But his late chayne his Liege unmeete esteemeth;
For so brave beasts she loveth best to see
     [She: I.e. the queen.]
In the wilde forrest raunging fresh and free.                        630
Therefore if fortune thee in court to live,
In case thou ever there wilt hope to thrive,
To some of these thou must thy selfe apply;
Els as a thistle-downe in th'ayre doth flie,
So vainly shalt thou too and fro be tost,                            635
And loose thy labour and thy fruitles cost.
And yet full few which follow them I see
For vertues bare regard advaunced bee,
But either for some gainfull benefit,
Or that they may for their owne turnes be fit.                       640
Nath'les, perhaps ye things may handle soe,
That ye may better thrive than thousands moe."
"But," said the Ape, "how shall we first come in,
That after we may favour seeke to win?"
"How els," said he, "but with a good bold face,                      645
And with big words, and with a stately pace,
That men may thinke of you in generall
That to be in you which is not at all:
For not by that which is the world now deemeth,
(As it was wont) but by that same that seemeth.                      650
Ne do I doubt but that ye well can fashion
Your selves theretoo, according to occasion.
So fare ye well: good courtiers may ye bee!"
So, proudlie neighing, from them parted hee.
Then gan this craftie couple to devize,                              655
How for the court themselves they might aguize:
     [_Aguize_, decorate.]
For thither they themselves meant to addresse,
In hope to finde there happier successe.
So well they shifted, that the Ape anon
Himselfe had cloathed like a gentleman,                              660
And the slie Foxe as like to be his groome;
That to the court in seemly sort they come.
Where the fond Ape, himselfe uprearing by
Upon his tiptoes, stalketh stately by,
As if he were some great magnifico,                                  665
And boldlie doth amongst the boldest go;
And his man Reynold, with fine counterfesaunce,
     [_Counterfesaunce_, counterfeiting.]
Supports his credite and his countenaunce.
Then gan the courtiers gaze on everie side,
And stare on him with big looks basen wide,                          670
     [_Basen_, swelled.]
Wondring what mister wight he was, and whence;
     [_Mister wight_, sort of creature.]
For he was clad in strange accoustrements,
Fashion'd with queint devises never seene
In court before, yet there all fashions beene;
Yet he them in newfanglenesse did pas.                               675
But his behaviour altogether was
_Alla Turchesca,_ much the more admyr'd;
     [_Alla Turchesca_, in the Turkish fashion.]
And his lookes loftie, as if he aspyr'd
To dignitie, and sdeign'd the low degree;
That all which did such strangenesse in him see                      680
By secrete meanes gan of his state enquire,
And privily his servant thereto hire:
Who, throughly arm'd against such coverture,
     [_Coverture_, underhand dealing.]
Reported unto all that he was sure
A noble gentleman of high regard,                                    685
Which through the world had with long travel far'd,
And seene the manners of all beasts on ground,
Now here arriv'd to see if like he found.
Thus did the Ape at first him credit gaine,
Which afterwards he wisely did maintaine                             690
With gallant showe, and daylie more augment
Through his fine feates and courtly complement;
For he could play, and daunce, and vaute, and spring,
And all that els pertaines to reveling.
Onely through kindly aptnes of his ioynts.                           695
     [_Kindly_, natural.]
Besides he could doo manie other poynts,
The which in court him served to good stead:
For he mongst ladies could their fortunes read
Out of their hands, and merie leasings tell,
And iuggle finely, that became him well.                             700
But he so light was at legierdemaine,
That what he toucht came not to light againe;
Yet would he laugh it out, and proudly looke,
And tell them that they greatly him mistooke.
So would he scoffe them out with mockcrie,                           705
For he therein had great felicitie;
And with sharp quips ioy'd others to deface,
Thinking that their disgracing did him grace:
So whilst that other like vaine wits he pleased
And made to laugh, his heart was greatly eased.                      710
But the right gentle minde woulde bite his lip,
To heare the iavell so good men to nip:
     [_Iavell_, worthless fellow.]
For, though the vulgar yeeld an open eare,
And common courtiers love to gybe and fleare
At everie thing which they heare spoken ill,                         715
And the best speaches with ill meaning spill,
     [_Spill_, spoil.]
Yet the brave courtier, in whose beauteous thought
Regard of honour harbours more than ought,
Doth loath such base condition, to backbite
     [_Condition_, quality.]
Anies good name for envie or despite.                                720
He stands on tearmes of honourable minde,
Ne will be carried with the common winde
Of courts inconstant mutabilitie,
Ne after everie tattling fable flie;
But heares and sees the follies of the rest,                         725
And thereof gathers for himselfe the best.
He will not creepe, nor crouche with fained face,
But walkes upright with comely stedfast pace,
And unto all doth yeeld due curtesie;
But not with kissed hand belowe the knee,                            730
As that same apish crue is wont to doo:
For he disdaines himselfe t'embase theretoo.
He hates fowle leasings and vile flatterie,
Two filthie blots in noble gentrie;
And lothefull idlenes he doth detest,                                735
The canker worme of everie gentle brest;
The which to banish with faire exercise
Of knightly feates he daylie doth devise:
Now menaging the mouthes of stubborne steedes,
Now practising the proofe of warlike deedes,                         740
Now his bright armes assaying, now his speare,
Now the nigh aymed ring away to beare:
At other times he casts to sew the chace
     [_Casts_, plans, makes arrangements.]
Of Swift wilde beasts, or runne on foote a race,
T'enlarge his breath, (large breath in armes most needfull,)         745
Or els by wrestling to wex strong and heedfull,
Or his stiffe armes to stretch with eughen bowe,
     [_Eughen_, made of yew.]
And manly legs, still passing too and fro,
Without a gowned beast him fast beside;
A vaine ensample of the Persian pride,                               750
Who after he had wonne th'Assyrian foe,
Did ever after scorne on foote to goe.
Thus when this courtly gentleman with toyle
Himselfe hath wearied, he doth recoyle
Unto his rest, and there with sweete delight                         755
Of musicks skill revives his toyled spright;
Or els with loves and ladies gentle sports,
The ioy of youth, himselfe he recomforts:
Or lastly, when the bodie list to pause,
His minde unto the Muses he withdrawes,                              760
Sweete Ladie Muses, ladies of delight,
Delights of life, and ornaments of light:
With whom he close confers with wise discourse,
Of Natures workes, of heavens continuall course,
Of forreine lands, of people different,                              765
Of kingdomes change, of divers gouvernment,
Of dreadfull battailes of renowmed knights;
With which he kindleth his ambitious sprights
To like desire and praise of noble fame,
The onely upshot whereto he doth ayme.                               770
For all his minde on honour fixed is,
To which he levels all his purposis,
And in his Princes service spends his dayes,
Not so much for to game, or for to raise
Himselfe to high degree, as for his grace,                           775
And in his liking to winne worthie place,
Through due deserts and comely carriage,
In whatso please employ his personage,
That may be matter meete to game him praise.
For he is fit to use in all assayes,                                 780
Whether for armes and warlike amenaunce,
     [_Amenaunce_, conduct.]
Or else for wise and civill governaunce;
For he is practiz'd well in policie,
And thereto doth his courting most applie:
     [_Courting_, life at court.]
To learne the enterdeale of princes strange,                         785
     [_Enterdeale_, dealing together.]
To marke th'intent of counsells, and the change
Of states, and eke of private men somewhile,
Supplanted by fine falshood and faire guile;
Of all the which he gathereth what is fit
T'enrich the storehouse of his powerfull wit,                        790
Which through wise speaches and grave conference
He daylie eekes, and brings to excellence.
     [_Eekes_, increases.]
Such is the rightfull courtier in his kinde:
But unto such the Ape lent not his minde;
Such were for him no fit companions,                                 795
Such would descrie his lewd conditions:
But the yong lustie gallants he did chose
To follow, meete to whom he might disclose
His witlesse pleasance and ill pleasing vaine.
A thousand wayes he them could entertaine,                           800
With all the thriftles games that may be found;
With mumming and with masking all around,
With dice, with cards, with balliards farre unfit,
     [_Balliards_, billiards.]
With shuttelcocks, misseeming manlie wit,
     [_Misseeming_, unbecoming.]
With courtizans, and costly riotize,                                 805
Whereof still somewhat to his share did rize:
Ne, them to pleasure, would he sometimes scorne
A pandares coate (so basely was he borne);
Thereto he could fine loving verses frame,
And play the poet oft. But ah! for shame,                            810
Let not sweete poets praise, whose onely pride
Is vertue to advaunce, and vice deride,
Be with the worke of losels wit defamed,
Ne let such verses poetrie be named!
Yet he the name on him would rashly take,                            815
Maugre the sacred Muses, and it make
A servant to the vile affection
Of such as he depended most upon;
And with the sugrie sweete thereof allure
Chast ladies eares to fantasies impure.                              820
To such delights the noble wits he led
Which him reliev'd, and their vaine humours fed
With fruitles folies and unsound delights.
But if perhaps into their noble sprights
Desire of honor or brave thought of armes                            825
Did ever creepe, then with his wicked charmes
And strong conceipts he would it drive away,
Ne suffer it to house there halfe a day.
And whenso love of letters did inspire
Their gentle wits, and kindly wise desire,                           830
     [Kindly: Qu. _kindle?_]
That chieflie doth each noble minde adorne,
Then he would scoffe at learning, and eke scorne
The sectaries thereof, as people base
     [_Sectaries_, followers.]
And simple men, which never came in place
Of worlds affaires, but, in darke corners mewd,                      835
Muttred of matters as their bookes them shewd,
Ne other knowledge ever did attaine,
But with their gownes their gravitie maintaine.
From them he would his impudent lewde speach
Against Gods holie ministers oft reach,                              840
And mocke divines and their profession.
What else then did he by progression,
But mocke High God himselfe, whom they professe?
But what car'd he for God, or godlinesse?
All his care was himselfe how to advaunce,                           845
And to uphold his courtly countenaunce
By all the cunning meanes he could devise;
"Were it by honest wayes, or otherwise,
He made small choyce: yet sure his honestie
Got him small gaines, but shameles flatterie,                        850
And filthie brocage, and unseemly shifts,
     [_Brocage_, pimping.]
And borowe base, and some good ladies gifts.
     [_Borowe_, pledging.]
But the best helpe, which chiefly him sustain'd,
Was his man Raynolds purchase which he gain'd:
     [_Purchase_, booty.]
For he was school'd by kinde in all the skill                        855
     [_Kinde_, nature.]
Of close conveyance, and each practise ill
Of coosinage and cleanly knaverie,
     [_Cleanly_, neat, skillful.]
Which oft maintain'd his masters braverie.
Besides, he usde another slipprie slight,
In taking on himselfe, in common sight,                              860
False personages fit for everie sted,
With which he thousands cleanly coosined:
Now like a merchant, merchants to deceave,
With whom his credite he did often leave
In gage for his gay masters hopelesse dett:                          865
Now like a lawyer, when he land would lett,
Or sell fee-simples in his masters name,
Which he had never, nor ought like the same;
Then would he be a broker, and draw in
Both wares and money, by exchange to win:                            870
Then would he seeme a farmer, that would sell
Bargaines of woods, which he did lately fell,
Or corne, or cattle, or such other ware,
Thereby to coosin men not well aware:
Of all the which there came a secret fee                             875
To th'Ape, that he his countenaunce might bee.
Besides all this, he us'd oft to beguile
Poore suters that in court did haunt some while:
For he would learne their busines secretly,
And then informe his master hastely,                                 880
That he by meanes might cast them to prevent,
     [_Prevent_, anticipate.]
And beg the sute the which the other ment.
Or otherwise false Reynold would abuse
The simple suter, and wish him to chuse
His master, being one of great regard                                885
In court, to compas anie sute not hard,
In case his paines were recompenst with reason:
So would he worke the silly man by treason
To buy his masters frivolous good will,
That had not power to doo him good or ill.                           890
So pitifull a thing is suters state!
Most miserable man, whom wicked fate
Hath brought to court, to sue for had-ywist,
That few have found, and manie one hath mist!
Full little knowest thou that hast not tride,                        895
What hell it is in suing long to bide:
To loose good dayes, that might be better spent;
To wast long nights in pensive discontent;
To speed to day, to be put back to morrow;
To feed on hope, to pine with feare and sorrow;                      900
To have thy Princes grace, yet want her Peeres;
To have thy asking, yet waite manie yeeres;
To fret thy soule with crosses and with cares;
To eate thy heart through comfortlesse dispaires;
To fawne, to crowche, to waite, to ride, to ronne,                   905
To spend, to give, to want, to be undonne.
Unhappie wight, borne to desastrous end,
That doth his life in so long tendance spend!
Who ever leaves sweete home, where meane estate
In safe assurance, without strife or hate,                           910
Findes all things needfull for contentment meeke,
And will to court for shadowes vaine to seeke,
Or hope to gaine, himselfe will a daw trie:
That curse God send unto mine enemie!
For none but such as this bold Ape unblest                           915
Can ever thrive in that unluckie quest;
Or such as hath a Reynold to his man,
That by his shifts his master furnish can.
But yet this Foxe could not so closely hide
His craftie feates, but that they were descride                      920
At length by such as sate in iustice seate,
Who for the same him fowlie did entreate;
And, having worthily him punished,
Out of the court for ever banished.
And now the Ape, wanting his huckster man,                           925
That wont provide his necessaries, gan
To growe into great lacke, ne could upholde
His countenaunce in those his garments olde;
Ne new ones could he easily provide,
Though all men him uncased gan deride,                               930
Like as a puppit placed in a play,
Whose part once past all men bid take away:
So that he driven was to great distresse,
And shortly brought to hopelesse wretchednesse.
Then closely as he might he cast to leave                            935
The court, not asking any passe or leave;
But ran away in his rent rags by night,
Ne ever stayd in place, ne spake to wight,
Till that the Foxe, his copesmate, he had found;
     [_Copesmate_, partner in trade.]
To whome complayning his unhappie stound,                            940
     [_Stound_, plight, exigency.]
At last againe with him in travell ioynd,
And with him far'd some better chaunee to fynde.
So in the world long time they wandered,
And mickle want and hardnesse suffered;
That them repented much so foolishly                                 945
To come so farre to seeke for misery,
And leave the sweetnes of contented home,
Though eating hipps and drinking watry fome.
     [_Hipps_, dog-rose berries.]
Thus as they them complayned too and fro,
Whilst through the forest rechlesse they did goe,                    950
     [_Rechlesse_, reckless.]
Lo! where they spide how in a gloomy glade
The Lyon sleeping lay in secret shade,
His crowne and scepter lying him beside,
And having doft for heate his dreadfull hide:
Which when they saw, the Ape was sore afrayde,                       955
And would have fled with terror all dismayde.
But him the Foxe with hardy words did stay,
And bad him put all cowardize away;
For now was time, if ever they would hope,
To ayme their counsels to the fairest scope,                         960
And them for ever highly to advaunce,
In case the good which their owne happie chaunce
Them freely offred they would wisely take.
Scarse could the Ape yet speake, so did he quake;
Yet, as he could, he askt how good might growe                       965
Where nought but dread and death do seeme in show.
"Now," sayd he, "whiles the Lyon sleepeth sound,
May we his crowne and mace take from the ground,
And eke his skinne, the terror of the wood,
Wherewith we may our selves, if we thinke good,                      970
Make kings of beasts, and lords of forests all
Subiect unto that powre imperiall."
"Ah! but," sayd the Ape, "who is so bold a wretch,
That dare his hardy hand to those outstretch,
When as he knowes his meede, if he be spide,                         975
To be a thousand deathes, and shame beside?"
"Fond Ape!" sayd then the Foxe, "into whose brest
Never crept thought of honor nor brave gest,
     [_Gest_, deed.]
Who will not venture life a king to be,
And rather rule and raigne in soveraign see,                         980
Than dwell in dust inglorious and bace,
Where none shall name the number of his place?
One ioyous howre in blisfull happines,
I chose before a life of wretchednes.
Be therefore counselled herein by me,                                985
And shake off this vile-harted cowardree.
If he awake, yet is not death the next,
For we may colour it with some pretext
Of this or that, that may excuse the cryme:
Else we may flye; thou to a tree mayst clyme,                        990
And I creepe under ground; both from his reach:
Therefore be rul'd to doo as I doo teach."
The Ape, that earst did nought but chill and quake,
Now gan some courage unto him to take,
And was content to attempt that enterprise,                          995
Tickled with glorie and rash covetise.
But first gan question, whether should assay
     [_Whether_, which of the two.]
Those royall ornaments to steale away?
"Marie, that shall your selfe," quoth he theretoo,
"For ye be fine and nimble it to doo;                               1000
Of all the beasts which in the forrests bee
Is not a fitter for this turne than yee:
Therefore, mine owne deare brother, take good hart,
And ever thinke a kingdome is your part."
Loath was the Ape, though praised, to adventer,                     1005
Yet faintly gan into his worke to enter,
Afraid of everie leafe that stir'd him by,
And everie stick that underneath did ly:
Upon his tiptoes nicely he up went,
For making noyse, and still his eare he lent                        1010
To everie sound that under heaven blew;
Now went, now stopt, now crept, now backward drew,
That it good sport had been him to have eyde.
Yet at the last, so well he him applyde,
Through his fine handling and cleanly play                          1015
He all those royall signes had stolne away,
And with the Foxes helpe them borne aside
Into a secret corner unespide.
Whither whenas they came they fell at words,
Whether of them should be the lords of lords:                       1020
For th'Ape was stryfull and ambicious,
And the Foxe guilefull and most covetous;
That neither pleased was to have the rayne
Twixt them divided into even twaine,
But either algates would be lords alone:                            1025
     [_Algates_, by all means.]
For love and lordship bide no paragone.
     [_Paragone_, equal, partner.]
"I am most worthie," said the Ape, "sith I
For it did put my life in ieopardie:
Thereto I am in person and in stature
Most like a man, the lord of everie creature,                       1030
So that it seemeth I was made to raigne,
And borne to be a kingly soveraigne."
"Nay," said the Foxe, "Sir Ape, you are astray;
For though to steale the diademe away
Were the worke of your nimble hand, yet I                           1035
Did first devise the plot by pollicie;
So that it wholly springeth from my wit:
For which also I claime my selfe more fit
Than you to rule: for government of state
Will without wisedome soone be ruinate.                             1040
And where ye claime your selfe for outward shape
Most like a man, man is not like an ape
In his chiefe parts, that is, in wit and spirite;
But I therein most like to him doo merite,
For my slie wyles and subtill craftinesse,                          1045
The title of the kingdome to possesse.
Nath'les, my brother, since we passed are
Unto this point, we will appease our iarre;
And I with reason meete will rest content,
That ye shall have both crowne and government,                      1050
Upon condition that ye ruled bee
In all affaires, and counselled by mee;
And that ye let none other ever drawe
Your minde from me, but keepe this as a lawe:
And hereupon an oath unto me plight."                               1055
The Ape was glad to end the strife so light,
And thereto swore: for who would not oft sweare,
And oft unsweare, a diademe to beare?
Then freely up those royall spoyles he tooke,
Yet at the Lyons skin he inly quooke;                               1060
But it dissembled, and upon his head
The crowne, and on his backe the skin, he did,
And the false Foxe him helped to array.
Then when he was all dight he tooke his way
Into the forest, that he might be seene                             1065
Of the wilde beasts in his new glory sheene.
There the two first whome he encountred were
The Sheepe and th'Asse, who, striken both with feare
At sight of him, gan fast away to flye;
But unto them the Foxe alowd did cry,                               1070
And in the kings name bad them both to stay,
Upon the payne that thereof follow may.
Hardly naythles were they restrayned so,
Till that the Foxe forth toward them did goe,
And there disswaded them from needlease feare,                      1075
For that the King did favour to them beare;
And therefore dreadles bad them come to corte;
For no wild beasts should do them any torte
     [_Torte_, wrong.]
There or abroad, ne would his Maiestye
Use them but well, with gracious clemencye,                         1080
As whome he knew to him both fast and true.
So he perswaded them with homage due
Themselves to humble to the Ape prostrate,
Who, gently to them bowing in his gate,
     [_Gate_, way.]
Receyved them with chearefull entertayne.                           1085
Thenceforth proceeding with his princely trayne,
He shortly met the Tygre, and the Bore,
Which with the simple Camell raged sore
In bitter words, seeking to take occasion
Upon his fleshly corpse to make invasion:                           1090
But soone as they this mock-king did espy,
Their troublous strife they stinted by and by,
     [_Stinted by and by_, stopped at once.]
Thinking indeed that it the Lyon was.
He then, to prove whether his powre would pas
As currant, sent the Foxe to them streight way,                     1095
Commaunding them their cause of strife bewray;
And, if that wrong on eyther side there were,
That he should warne the wronger to appeare
The morrow next at court, it to defend;
In the meane time upon the King t'attend.                           1100
The subtile Foxe so well his message sayd,
That the proud beasts him readily obayd:
Whereby the Ape in wondrous stomack woxe,
Strongly encorag'd by the crafty Foxe;
That king indeed himselfe he shortly thought,                       1105
And all the beasts him feared as they ought,
And followed unto his palaice hye;
Where taking congé, each one by and by
Departed to his home in dreadfull awe,
Full of the feared sight which late they sawe.                      1110
The Ape, thus seized of the regall throne,
Eftsones by counsell of the Foxe alone
Gan to provide for all things in assurance,
That so his rule might lenger have endurance.
First, to his gate be pointed a strong gard,                        1115
That none might enter but with issue hard:
Then, for the safegard of his personage,
He did appoint a warlike equipage
Of forreine beasts, not in the forest bred,
But part by land and part by water fed;                             1120
For tyrannie is with strange ayde supported.
Then unto him all monstrous beasts resorted
Bred of two kindes, as Griffons, Minotaures,
Crocodiles, Dragons, Beavers, and Centaures:
With those himselfe he strengthned mightelie,                       1125
That feare he neede no force of enemie.
Then gan he rule and tyrannize at will,
Like as the Foxe did guide his graceles skill;
And all wylde beasts made vassals of his pleasures,
And with their spoyles enlarg'd his private treasures.
No care of iustice, nor no rule of reason,                          1131
No temperance, nor no regard of season,
Did thenceforth ever enter in his minde;
But crueltie, the signe of currish kinde,
And sdeignfull pride, and wilfull arrogaunce;                       1135
Such followes those whom fortune doth advaunce.
But the false Foxe most kindly plaid his part:
     [_Kindly_, according to his nature.]
For whatsoever mother-wit or arte
Could worke, he put in proofe: no practise slie,
No counterpoint of cunning policie,                                 1140
     [_Counterpoint_, counterplot.]
Ne reach, no breach, that might him profit bring,
But he the same did to his purpose wring.
Nought suffered he the Ape to give or graunt,
But through his hand must passe the fiaunt.
     [_Fiaunt_, fiat.]
All offices, all leases by him lept,                                1145
And of them all whatso he likte he kept.
Iustice he solde iniustice for to buy,
And for to purchase for his progeny.
     [_Purchase_, collect spoil.]
Ill might it prosper that ill gotten was,
But, so he got it, little did he pas.                               1150
     [_Pas_, care.]
He fed his cubs with fat of all the soyle,
And with the sweete of others sweating toyle;
He crammed them with crumbs of benefices,
And fild their mouthes with meeds of malefices;
     [_Malifices_, evil deeds.]
He cloathed them with all colours save white,                       1155
And loded them with lordships and with might,
So much as they were able well to beare,
That with the weight their backs nigh broken were.
He chaffred chayres in which churchmen were set,
     [_Chaffred_, bartered.]
And breach of lawes to privie ferme did let.                        1160
     [_Ferme_, farm.]
No statute so established might bee,
Nor ordinaunce so needfull, but that hee
Would violate, though not with violence,
Yet under colour of the confidence
The which the Ape repos'd in him alone,                             1165
And reckned him the kingdomes corner stone.
And ever, when he ought would bring to pas,
His long experience the platforme was:
And when he ought not pleasing would put by
The cloke was care of thrift, and husbandry,                        1170
For to encrease the common treasures store.
But his owne treasure he encreased more,
And lifted up his loftie towres thereby,
That they began to threat the neighbour sky;
The whiles the princes pallaces fell fast                           1175
To ruine; for what thing can ever last?
And whilest the other peeres for povertie
Were forst their auncient houses to let lie,
And their olde castles to the ground to fall,
Which their forefathers famous over-all                             1180
     [_Over-all_, everywhere.]
Had founded for the kingdomes ornament,
And for their memories long moniment.
But he no count made of nobilitie,
Nor the wilde beasts whom armes did glorifie,                       1185
The realmes chiefe strength and girlond of the crowne.
All these through fained crimes he thrust adowne,
Or made them dwell in darknes of disgrace:
For none but whom he list might come in place.
Of men of armes he had but small regard,
But kept them lowe, and streigned verie hard.                       1190
For men of learning little he esteemed;
His wisedome he above their learning deemed.
As for the rascall commons, least he cared,
For not so common was his bountie shared:                           1194
"Let God," said he, "if please, care for the manie,
I for my selfe must care before els anie."
So did he good to none, to manie ill,
So did he all the kingdome rob and pill,
     [_Pill_, plunder.]
Yet none durst speake, ne none durst of him plaine;
So great he was in grace, and rich through game.
Ne would he anie let to have accesse                                1201
Unto the Prince, but by his owne addresse:
For all that els did come were sure to faile;
Yet would he further none but for availe.
For on a time the Sheepe, to whom of yore                           1205
The Foxe had promised of friendship store,
What time the Ape the kingdome first did gaine,
Came to the court, her case there to complaine;
How that the Wolfe, her mortall enemie,
Had sithence slaine her lambe most cruellie;                        1210
     [_Sithence_, since.]
And therefore crav'd to come unto the King,
To let him knowe the order of the thing.
"Soft, Gooddie Sheepe!" then said the Foxe, "not soe:
Unto the King so rash ye may not goe;
He is with greater matter busied                                    1215
Than a lambe, or the lambes owne mothers hed.
Ne certes may I take it well in part,
That ye my cousin Wolfe so fowly thwart,
And seeke with slaunder his good name to blot:
For there was cause, els doo it he would not:                       1220
Therefore surcease, good dame, and hence depart."
So went the Sheepe away with heavie hart;
So manie moe, so everie one was used,
That to give largely to the boxe refused.

Now when high Iove, in whose almightie hand                         1225
The care of kings and power of empires stand,
Sitting one day within his turret hye,
From whence he vewes with his black-lidded eye
Whatso the heaven in his wide vawte containes,
And all that in the deepest earth remaines,                         1230
And troubled kingdome of wilde beasts behelde,
Whom not their kindly sovereigne did welde,
     [_Welde_, govern.]
But an usurping Ape, with guile suborn'd,
Had all subverst, he sdeignfully it scorn'd
In his great heart, and hardly did refraine                         1235
But that with thunder bolts he had him slaine,
And driven downe to hell, his dewest meed.
But him avizing, he that dreadfull deed
Forbore, and rather chose with scornfull shame
Him to avenge, and blot his brutish name                            1240
Unto the world, that never after anie
Should of his race be voyd of infamie;
And his false counsellor, the cause of all,
To damne to death, or dole perpetuall,
From whence he never should be quit nor stal'd.
     [_Stal'd_, forestalled (?).]
Forthwith he Mercurie unto him cal'd,                               1246
And bad him flie with never-resting speed
Unto the forrest, where wilde beasts doo breed,
And, there enquiring privily, to learne
What did of late chaunce to the Lyon stearne,                       1250
That he rul'd not the empire, as he ought;
And whence were all those plaints unto him brought
Of wrongs and spoyles by salvage beasts committed:
Which done, he bad the Lyon be remitted
Into his seate, and those same treachours vile                      1255
     [_Treachours_, traitors.]
Be punished for their presumptuous guile.
The sonne of Maia, soone as he receiv'd
That word, streight with his azure wings he cleav'd
The liquid clowdes and lucid firmament,
Ne staid till that he came with steep descent                       1260
Unto the place where his prescript did showe.
There stouping, like an arrowe from a bowe,
He soft arrived on the grassie plaine,
And fairly paced forth with easie paine,
Till that unto the pallace nigh he came.                            1265
Then gan he to himselfe new shape to frame,
And that faire face, and that ambrosiall hew,
Which wonts to decke the gods immortall crew,
And beautefie the shinie firmament,
He doft, unfit for that rude rabblement.                            1270
So, standing by the gates in strange disguize,
He gan enquire of some in secret wize,
Both of the King, and of his government,
And of the Foxe, and his false blandishment:
And evermore he heard each one complaine                            1275
Of foule abuses both in realme and raine:
Which yet to prove more true, he meant to see,
And an ey-witnes of each thing to bee.
Tho on his head his dreadfull hat he dight,
Which maketh him invisible in sight,                                1280
And mocketh th'eyes of all the lookers on,
Making them thinke it but a vision.
Through power of that he runnes through enemies swerds;
Through power of that he passeth through the herds
Of ravenous wilde beasts, and doth beguile                          1285
Their greedie mouthes of the expected spoyle;
Through power of that his cunning theeveries
He wonts to worke, that none the same espies;
And through the power of that he putteth on
What shape he list in apparition.                                   1290
That on his head he wore, and in his hand
He tooke caduceus, his snakie wand,
With which the damned ghosts he governeth,
And furies rules, and Tartare tempereth.
With that he causeth sleep to seize the eyes,                       1295
And feare the harts, of all his enemyes;
And when him list, an universall night
Throughout the world he makes on everie wight;
As when his syre with Alcumena lay.
Thus dight, into the court he tooke his way,                        1300
Both through the gard, which never him descride,
And through the watchmen, who him never spide:
Thenceforth he past into each secrete part,
Whereas he saw, that sorely griev'd his hart,
Each place abounding with fowle iniuries,                           1305
And fild with treasure rackt with robberies;
Each place defilde with blood of guiltles beasts
Which had been slaine to serve the Apes beheasts;
Gluttonie, malice, pride, and covetize,
And lawlesnes raigning with riotize;                                1310
Besides the infinite extortions,
Done through the Foxes great oppressions,
That the complaints thereof could not be tolde.
Which when he did with lothfull eyes beholde,
He would no more endure, but came his way,                          1315
And cast to seeke the Lion, where he may,
     [_Cast_, projected.]
That he might worke the avengement for this shame
On those two caytives which had bred him blame
And seeking all the forrest busily,
At last he found where sleeping he did ly.                          1320
The wicked weed which there the Foxe did lay
From underneath his head he tooke away,
And then him, waking, forced up to rize.
The Lion, looking up, gan him avize,
     [_Avize_, bethink.]
As one late in a traunce, what had of long                          1325
Become of him: for fantasie is strong.
"Arise," said Mercurie, "thou sluggish beast,
That here liest senseles, like the corpse deceast,
The whilste thy kingdome from thy head is rent,
And thy throne royall with dishonour blent:                         1330
     [_Blent_, stained.]
Arise, and doo thy selfe redeeme from shame,
And be aveng'd on those that breed thy blame."
Thereat enraged, soone he gan upstart,
Grinding his teeth, and grating his great hart;
And, rouzing up himselfe, for his rough hide                        1335
He gan to reach; but no where it espide.
Therewith he gan full terribly to rore,
And chafte at that indignitie right sore.
But when his crowne and scepter both he wanted,
Lord! how he fum'd, and sweld, and rag'd, and panted,
And threatned death and thousand deadly dolours
To them that had purloyn'd his princely honours.
With that in hast, disroabed as he was,
He toward his owne pallace forth did pas;
And all the way he roared as he went,                               1345
That all the forrest with astonishment
Thereof did tremble, and the beasts therein
Fled fast away from that so dreadfull din.
At last he came unto his mansion,
Where all the gates he found fast lockt anon                        1350
And manie warders round about them stood:
With that he roar'd alowd, as he were wood,
     [_Wood_, frantic.]
That all the pallace quaked at the stound,
     [_Stound_, (time, scene) tumult.]
As if it quite were riven from the ground,
And all within were dead and hartles left;                          1355
And th'Ape himselfe, as one whose wits were reft,
Fled here and there, and everie corner sought.
To hide himselfe from his owne feared thought.
But the false Foxe, when he the Lion heard,
Fled closely forth, streightway of death afeard,                    1360
     [_Closely_, secretly.]
And to the Lion came, full lowly creeping,
With fained face, and watrie eyne halfe weeping,
T'excuse his former treason and abusion,
And turning all unto the Apes confusion:
Nath'les the royall beast forbore beleeving,                        1365
But bad him stay at ease till further preeving.
     [_Preeving_, proving.]
Then when he saw no entrance to him graunted,
Roaring yet lowder that all harts it daunted,
Upon those gates with force he fiercely newe,
And, rending them in pieces, felly slewe                            1370
Those warders strange, and all that els he met
But th'Ape still flying he no where might get:
From rowme to rowme, from beame to beame he fled,
All breathles, and for feare now almost ded:
Yet him at last the Lyon spide, and caught,                         1375
And forth with shame unto his iudgement brought.
Then all the beasts he causd' assembled bee,
To heare their doome, and sad ensample see:
The Foxe, first author of that treacherie
He did uncase, and then away let flie.                              1380
     [_Uncase_, strip of his disguise.]
But th'Apes long taile (which then he had) he quight
Cut off, and both eares pared of their hight;
Since which, all Apes but halfe their eares have left,
And of their tailes are utterlie bereft.

So Mother Hubberd her discourse did end:                            1385
Which pardon me if I amisse have pend,
For weake was my remembrance it to hold,
And bad her tongue that it so bluntly tolde.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES:

MOTHER HUBBERDS TALE. This charming little poem, Spenser's only
successful effort at satire, is stated by the author to have been
composed in the raw conceit of his youth. There is internal evidence,
however, that some of the happiest passages were added at the date of
its publication, at which time the whole was probably retouched.
Although Mother Hubberds Tale is in its plan an imitation of the
satires of Reynard the Fox; the treatment of the subject is quite
original. For the combination of elegance with simplicity, this poem
will stand a comparison with Goethe's celebrated translation of the
Reineke. C.

Ver. I.--_It was the month_, &c. August.

Ver. 453.--_Diriges_, dirges. The office for the dead received this
name from the antiphon with which the first nocturne in the mattens
commenced, taken from Psalm v. 8, "Dirige, Domine Deus meus, in
conspectu tuo viam meam." Way's _Promptorium Parvulorum._ C.

Ver. 519.--_Scarse can a bishoprick_, &c. This is probably an allusion
to the frequent alienations of the lands and manors of bishoprics in
Elizabeth's time. TODD.

Ver. 562.--_The ordinarie._ An ordinary is a judge having jurisdiction
in ecclesiastical matters. In England, it is usually the bishop of the
diocese. H.

Ver. 623, 624.--The Queen was so much pleased with the results of the
Portugal expedition of 1589, that she honored the commanders, and Sir
Walter Raleigh among the rest, with a gold chain. C.

Ver. 717.--_The brave courtier_, &c. This description is perhaps
intended for Sir Philip Sidney. C.

Ver. 893.--Had-ywist. That is, _had I wist! had I known_ that it would
end so! a proverbial expression for late repentance consequent on
disappointment. C.

Ver. 901.--_To have thy Princes grace, yet want her Peeres._ Elizabeth
was said to have granted Spenser a pension which Burghley intercepted,
and to have ordered him a gratuity which her minister neglected to pay.
C.

Ver. 913.--_Himselfe will a daw trie._ So the old copy: the reading
should probably be _himselfe a daw will trie_, prove or find himself by
experience to be a daw or fool. C.

Ver. 1189.--_Of men of armes,_ &c. This passage certainly provokes an
application to Lord Burghley, and was probably intended for him. C.


       *       *       *       *       *

RUINES OF ROME:

BY BELLAY*

[* Joachim du Bellay, a French poet of considerable reputation in his
day, died in 1560. These sonnets are translated from _Le Premier Livre
des Antiquez de Rome_. Further on we have the Visions of Bellay,
translated from the _Songes_ of the same author. The best that can be
said of these sonnets seems to be, that they are not inferior to the
original. C.]


I.

Ye heavenly spirites, whose ashie cinders lie
Under deep ruines, with huge walls opprest,
But not your praise, the which shall never die
Through your faire verses, ne in ashes rest;
If so be shrilling voyce of wight alive
May reach from hence to depth of darkest hell,
Then let those deep abysses open rive,
That ye may understand my shreiking yell!
Thrice having seene under the heavens veale
Your toombs devoted compasse over all,
Thrice unto you with lowd voyce I appeale,
And for your antique furie here doo call,
  The whiles that I with sacred horror sing
  Your glorie, fairest of all earthly thing!


II.

Great Babylon her haughtie walls will praise,
And sharped steeples high shot up in ayre;
Greece will the olde Ephesian buildings blaze,
And Nylus nurslings their Pyramidcs faire;
The same yet vaunting Greece will tell the storie
Of Ioves great image in Olympus placed;
Mausolus worke will be the Carians glorie,
And Crete will boast the Labyrinth, now raced;
The antique Rhodian will likewise set forth
The great Colosse, erect to Memorie;
And what els in the world is of like worth,
Some greater learned wit will magnifie.
  But I will sing above all moniments
  Seven Romane Hils, the worlds seven wonderments.


III.

Thou stranger, which for Rome in Rome hero seekest,
And nought of Rome in Rome perceiv'st at all,
These same olde walls, olde arches, which thou seest,
Olde palaces, is that which Rome men call.
Beholde what wreake, what mine, and what wast,
And how that she which with her mightie powre
Tam'd all the world hath tam'd herselfe at last;
The pray of Time, which all things doth devowre!
Rome now of Rome is th'onely funerall,
And onely Rome of Rome hath victorie;
Ne ought save Tyber hastning to his fall
Remaines of all: O worlds inconstancie!
  That which is firme doth flit and fall away,
  And that is flitting doth abide and stay.


IV.

She whose high top above the starres did sore,
One foote on Thetis, th'other on the Morning,
One hand on Scythia, th'other on the More,
Both heaven and earth in roundnesse compassing;
Iove fearing, least if she should greater growe,
The old giants should once againe uprise,
Her whelm'd with hills, these seven hils, which be nowe
Tombes of her greatnes which did threate the skies:
Upon her head he heapt Mount Saturnal,
Upon her bellie th'antique Palatine,
Upon her stomacke laid Mount Quirinal,
On her left hand the noysome Esquiline,
  And Caelian on the right; but both her feete
  Mount Viminal and Aventine doo meete.


V.

Who lists to see what ever nature, arte,
And heaven could doo, O Rome, thee let him see,
In case thy greatnes he can gesse in harte
By that which but the picture is of thee!
Rome is no more: but if the shade of Rome
May of the bodie yeeld a seeming sight,
It's like a corse drawne forth out of the tombe
By magicke skill out of eternall night:
The corpes of Rome in ashes is entombed,
And her great spirite, reioyned to the spirite
Of this great masse, is in the same enwombed;
But her brave writings, which, her famous merite
  In spight of Time out of the dust doth reare,
  Doo make her idole* through the world appeare.
[* _Idole_, image, idea.]


VI.

Such as the Berecynthian goddesse bright,
In her swifte charret with high turrets crownde,
Proud that so manie gods she brought to light,
Such was this citie in her good daies fownd:
This citie, more than that great Phrygian mother
Renowm'd for fruite of famous progenie,
Whose greatnes by the greatnes of none other,
But by her selfe, her equall match could see:
Rome onely might to Rome compared bee,
And onely Rome could make great Rome to tremble:
So did the gods by heavenly doome decree,
That other earthlie power should not resemble
  Her that did match the whole earths puissaunce,
  And did her courage to the heavens advaunce.


VII.

Ye sacred ruines, and ye tragick sights,
Which onely doo the name of Rome retaine,
Olde moniments, which of so famous sprights
The honour yet in ashes doo maintaine,
Triumphant arcks, spyres neighbours to the skie,
That you to see doth th'heaven it selfe appall,
Alas! by little ye to nothing flie,
The peoples fable, and the spoyle of all!
And though your frames do for a time make warre
Gainst Time, yet Time in time shall ruinate
Your workes and names, and your last reliques marre.
My sad desires, rest therefore moderate!
  For if that Time make ende of things so sure,
  It als will end the paine which I endure.


VIII.

Through armes and vassals Rome the world subdu'd,
That one would weene that one sole cities strength
Both land and sea in roundnes had survew'd,
To be the measure of her bredth and length:
This peoples vertue yet so fruitfull was
Of vertuous nephewes*, that posteritie,
Striving in power their grandfathers to passe,
The lowest earth ioin'd to the heaven hie;
To th'end that, having all parts in their power,
Nought from the Romane Empire might be quight**;
And that though Time doth commonwealths devowre,
Yet no time should so low embase their hight,
  That her head, earth'd in her foundations deep,
  Should not her name and endles honour keep.
[* _Nephewes_, descendants.]
[** _Quight_, quit, free.]


IX.

Ye cruell starres, and eke ye gods unkinde,
Heaven envious, and bitter stepdame Nature!
Be it by fortune, or by course of kinde*,
That ye doo weld th'affaires of earthlie creature;
Why have your hands long sithence traveiled
To frame this world, that doth endure so long?
Or why were not these Romane palaces
Made of some matter no lesse firme and strong?
I say not, as the common voyce doth say,
That all things which beneath the moone have being
Are temporall and subiect to decay:
But I say rather, though not all agreeing
  With some that weene the contrarie in thought,
  That all this whole shall one day come to nought.
[* _Kinde_, nature.]


X.

As that brave sonne of Aeson, which by charmes
Atcheiv'd the golden fleece in Colchid land,
Out of the earth engendred men of armes
Of dragons teeth, sowne in the sacred sand,
So this brave towne, that in her youthlie daies
An hydra was of warriours glorious,
Did fill with her renowmed nourslings praise
The firie sunnes both one and other hous:
But they at last, there being then not living
An Hercules so ranke seed to represse,
Emongst themselves with cruell furie striving,
Mow'd downe themselves with slaughter mercilesse;
  Renewing in themselves that rage unkinde,
  Which whilom did those earthborn brethren blinde.


XI.

Mars, shaming to have given so great head
To his off-spring, that mortall puissaunce,
Puft up with pride of Romane hardiehead,
Seem'd above heavens powre it selfe to advaunce,
Cooling againe his former kindled heate
With which he had those Romane spirits fild.
Did blowe new fire, and with enflamed breath
Into the Gothicke colde hot rage instil'd.
Then gan that nation, th'earths new giant brood,
To dart abroad the thunderbolts of warre,
And, beating downe these walls with furious mood
Into her mothers bosome, all did marre;
  To th'end that none, all were it* love his sire,
  Should boast himselfe of the Romane empire.
[* _All were it_, although it were.]


XII.

Like as whilome the children of the earth
Heapt hils on hils to scale the starrie skie,
And fight against the gods of heavenly berth,
Whiles Iove at them his thunderbolts let flie;
All suddenly with lightning overthrowne,
The furious squadrons downe to ground did fall,
That th'earth under her childrens weight did grone,
And th'heavens in glorie triumpht over all;
So did that haughtie front, which heaped was
On these seven Romane hils, it selfe upreare
Over the world, and lift her loftie face
Against the heaven, that gan her force to feare.
  But now these scorned fields bemone her fall,
  And gods secure feare not her force at all.


XIII.

Nor the swift furie of the flames aspiring,
Nor the deep wounds of victours raging blade,
Nor ruthlesse spoyle of souldiers blood-desiring,
The which so oft thee, Rome, their conquest made,
Ne stroke on stroke of fortune variable,
Ne rust of age hating continuance,
Nor wrath of gods, nor spight of men unstable,
Nor thou oppos'd against thine owne puissance,
Nor th'horrible uprore of windes high blowing,
Nor swelling streames of that god snakie-paced*
Which hath so often with his overflowing
Thee drenched, have thy pride so much abaced,
  But that this nothing, which they have thee left,
  Makes the world wonder what they from thee reft.
[* _Snakie-paced_, winding; or perhaps (like Ovid's _anguipes_) swift.]


XIV.

As men in summer fearles passe the foord
Which is in winter lord of all the plaine,
And with his tumbling streames doth beare aboord*
The ploughmans hope and shepheards labour vaine,
And as the coward beasts use to despise
The noble lion after his lives end,
Whetting their teeth, and with vaine foolhardise
Daring the foe that cannot him defend,
And as at Troy most dastards of the Greekes
Did brave about the corpes of Hector colde,
So those which whilome wont with pallid cheekes
The Romane triumphs glorie to behold,
  Now on these ashie tombes shew boldnesse vaine,
  And, conquer'd, dare the conquerour disdaine.
[*_Aboord_, into the current.]


XV.

Ye pallid spirits, and ye ashie ghoasts,
Which, ioying in the brightnes of your day,
Brought foorth those signes of your presumptuous boasts
Which now their dusty reliques do bewray,
Tell me, ye spirits! (sith the darksome river
Of Styx, not passable to soules returning,
Enclosing you in thrice three wards for ever,
Doo not restraine your images still mourning,)
Tell me then, (for perhaps some one of you
Yet here above him secretly doth hide,)
Doo ye not feele your torments to accrewe,
When ye sometimes behold the ruin'd pride
  Of these old Romane works, built with your hands,
  To become nought els but heaped sands?


XVI.

Like as ye see the wrathfull sea from farre
In a great mountaine heap't with hideous noyse,
Eftsoones of thousand billowes shouldred narre*,
Against a rocke to breake with dreadfull poyse;
Like as ye see fell Boreas with sharpe blast
Tossing huge tempests through the troubled skie,
Eftsoones having his wide wings spent in wast,
To stop his wearie cariere** suddenly;
And as ye see huge flames spred diverslie,
Gathered in one up to the heavens to spyre,
Eftsoones consum'd to fall downe feebily,
So whilom did this monarchie aspyre
  As waves, as winde, as fire, spred over all,
  Till it by fatall doome adowne did fall.
[* _Narre_, nearer.]
[** _Cariere_, career.]


XVII.

So long as Ioves great bird did make his flight,
Bearing the fire with which heaven doth us fray,
Heaven had not feare of that presumptuous might,
With which the giaunts did the gods assay:
But all so soone as scortching sunne had brent*
His wings which wont the earth to overspredd,
The earth out of her massie wombe forth sent
That antique horror which made heaven adredd.
Then was the Germane raven in disguise
That Romane eagle seene to cleave asunder,
And towards heaven freshly to arise
Out of these mountaines, now consum'd to pouder.
  In which the foule that serves to beare the lightning
  Is now no more seen flying nor alighting.
[* _Brent_, burned.]


XVIII.

These heapes of stones, these old wals which ye see,
Were first enclosures but of salvage soyle;
And these brave pallaces, which maystred bee
Of time, were shepheards cottages somewhile.
Then tooke the shepheards kingly ornaments
And the stout hynde arm'd his right hand with steele:
Eftsoones their rule of yearely presidents
Grew great, and sixe months greater a great deele;
Which, made perpetuall, rose to so great might,
That thence th'imperiall eagle rooting tooke,
Till th'heaven it selfe, opposing gainst her might,
Her power to Peters successor betooke,
  Who, shepheardlike, (as Fates the same foreseeing,)
  Doth shew that all things turne to their first being.
[XVIII. 8.--_Sixe months_, &c. The term of the dictatorship at Rome.]


XIX.

All that is perfect, which th'heaven beautefies;
All that's imperfect, borne belowe the moone;
All that doth feede our spirits and our eies;
And all that doth consume our pleasures soone;
All the mishap the which our daies outweares;
All the good hap of th'oldest times afore,
Rome, in the time of her great ancesters,
Like a Pandora, locked long in store.
But destinie this huge chaos turmoyling,
In which all good and evill was enclosed,
Their heavenly vertues from these woes assoyling,
Caried to heaven, from sinfull bondage losed:
  But their great sinnes, the causers of their paine,
  Under these antique ruines yet remaine.


XX.

No otherwise than raynie cloud, first fed
With earthly vapours gathered in the ayre,
Eftsoones in compas arch't, to steepe his hed,
Doth plonge himselfe in Tethys bosome faire,
And, mounting up againe from whence he came,
With his great bellie spreds the dimmed world,
Till at the last, dissolving his moist frame,
In raine, or snowe, or haile, he forth is horld,
This citie, which was first but shepheards shade,
Uprising by degrees, grewe to such height
That queene of land and sea her selfe she made.
At last, not able to beare so great weight,
  Her power, disperst, through all the world did vade*;
  To shew that all in th'end to nought shall fade.
[* _Vade_, vanish.]


XXI.

The same which Pyrrhus and the puissaunce
Of Afrike could not tame, that same brave citie
Which, with stout courage arm'd against mischaunce,
Sustein'd the shocke of common enmitie,
Long as her ship, tost with so manie freakes,
Had all the world in armes against her bent,
Was never seene that anie fortunes wreakes
Could breake her course begun with brave intent.
But, when the obiect of her vertue failed,
Her power it selfe against it selfe did arme;
As he that having long in tempest sailed
Faine would arive, but cannot for the storme,
  If too great winde against the port him drive,
  Doth in the port it selfe his vessell rive.


XXII.

When that brave honour of the Latine name,
Which mear'd* her rule with Africa and Byze**,
With Thames inhabitants of noble fame,
And they which see the dawning day arize,
Her nourslings did with mutinous uprore
Harten against her selfe, her conquer'd spoile,
Which she had wonne from all the world afore,
Of all the world was spoyl'd within a while:
So, when the compast course of the universe
In sixe and thirtie thousand yeares is ronne,
The bands of th'elements shall backe reverse
To their first discord, and be quite undonne;
  The seedes of which all things at first were bred
  Shall in great Chaos wombe againe be hid.
[* _Mear'd_, bounded.]
[** _Byze_, Byzantium.]


XXIII.

O warie wisedome of the man* that would
That Carthage towres from spoile should be forborne,
To th'end that his victorious people should
With cancring laisure not be overworne!
He well foresaw how that the Romane courage,
Impatient of pleasures faint desires,
Through idlenes would turne to civill rage,
And be her selfe the matter of her fires.
For in a people given all to ease,
Ambition is engendred easily;
As, in a vicious bodie, grose disease
Soone growes through humours superfluitie.
  That came to passe, when, swolne with plenties pride,
  Nor prince, nor peere, nor kin, they would abide.
[* I.e. Scipio Nasica.]


XXIV.

If the blinde Furie which warres breedeth oft
Wonts not t'enrage the hearts of equall beasts,
Whether they fare on foote, or flie aloft,
Or armed be with clawes, or scalie creasts,
What fell Erynnis, with hot burning tongs,
Did grype your hearts with noysome rage imbew'd,
That, each to other working cruell wrongs,
Your blades in your owne bowels you embrew'd?
Was this, ye Romanes, your hard destinie?
Or some old sinne, whose unappeased guilt
Powr'd vengeance forth on you eternallie?
Or brothers blood, the which at first was spilt
  Upon your walls, that God might not endure
  Upon the same to set foundation sure?


XXV.

O that I had the Thracian poets harpe,
For to awake out of th'infernall shade
Those antique Caesars, sleeping long in darke,
The which this auncient citie whilome made!
Or that I had Amphions instrument,
To quicken with his vitall notes accord
The stonie ioynts of these old walls now rent,
By which th'Ausonian light might be restor'd!
Or that at least I could with pencill fine
Fashion the pourtraicts of these palacis,
By paterne of great Virgils spirit divine!
I would assay with that which in me is
  To builde, with levell of my loftie style,
  That which no hands can evermore compyle.


XXVI.

Who list the Romane greatnes forth to figure,
Him needeth not to seeke for usage right
Of line, or lead, or rule, or squaire, to measure
Her length, her breadth, her deepnes, or her hight;
But him behooves to vew in compasse round
All that the ocean graspes in his long armes;
Be it where the yerely starre doth scortch the ground,
Or where colde Boreas blowes his bitter stormes.
Rome was th'whole world, and al the world was Rome;
And if things nam'd their names doo equalize,
When land and sea ye name, then name ye Rome,
And, naming Rome, ye land and sea comprize:
  For th'auncient plot of Rome, displayed plaine,
  The map of all the wide world doth containe.


XXVII.

Thou that at Rome astonisht dost behold
The antique pride which menaced the skie,
These haughtie heapes, these palaces of olde,
These wals, these arcks, these baths, these temples his,
Iudge, by these ample ruines vew, the rest
The which iniurious time hath quite outworne,
Since, of all workmen helde in reckning best,
Yet these olde fragments are for paternes borne:
Then also marke how Rome, from day to day,
Repayring her decayed fashion,
Renewes herselfe with buildings rich and gay;
That one would iudge that the Romaine Daemon*
  Doth yet himselfe with fatall hand enforce
  Againe on foot to reare her pouldred** corse.
[* _Romaine Daemon_, Genius of Rome.]
[** _Pouldred_, reduced to dust.]


XXVIII.

He that hath seene a great oke drie and dead,
Yet clad with reliques of some trophees olde,
Lifting to heaven her aged hoarie head,
Whose foote in ground hath left but feeble holde,
But halfe disbowel'd lies above the ground,
Shewing her wreathed rootes, and naked armes,
And on her trunke all rotten and unsound
Onely supports herselfe for meate of wormes,
And, though she owe her fall to the first winde,
Yet of the devout people is ador'd,
And manie yong plants spring out of her rinde;
Who such an oke hath seene, let him record
  That such this cities honour was of yore,
  And mongst all cities florished much more.


XXIX.

All that which Aegypt whilome did devise,
All that which Greece their temples to embrave,
After th'Ionicke, Atticke, Doricke guise,
Or Corinth skil'd in curious workes to grave,
All that Lysippus practike* arte could forme,
Apelles wit, or Phidias his skill,
Was wont this auncient citie to adorne,
And the heaven it selfe with her wide wonders fill.
All that which Athens ever brought forth wise,
All that which Afrike ever brought forth strange,
All that which Asie ever had of prise,
Was here to see. O mervelous great change!
  Rome, living, was the worlds sole ornament;
  And, dead, is now the worlds sole moniment.
[* _Practike_, cunning.]


XXX.

Like as the seeded field greene grasse first showes,
Then from greene grasse into a stalke doth spring,
And from a stalke into an eare forth-growes,
Which eare the frutefull graine doth shortly bring,
And as in season due the husband* mowes
The waving lockes of those faire yeallow heares,
Which, bound in sheaves, and layd in comely rowes,
Upon the naked fields in stalkes he reares,
So grew the Romane empire by degree,
Till that barbarian hands it quite did spill,
And left of it but these olde markes to see,
Of which all passers by doo somewhat pill**,
  As they which gleane, the reliques use to gather
  Which th'husbandman behind him chanst to scater.
[* _Husband_, husbandman.]
[** _Pill_, plunder.]


XXXI.

That same is now nought but a champian wide,
Where all this worlds pride once was situate.
No blame to thee, whosoever dost abide
By Nyle, or Gange, or Tygre, or Euphrate;
Ne Afrike thereof guiltie is, nor Spaine,
Nor the bolde people by the Thamis brincks,
Nor the brave warlicke brood of Alemaine,
Nor the borne souldier which Rhine running drinks.
Thou onely cause, O Civill Furie, art!
Which, sowing in th'Aemathian fields thy spight,
Didst arme thy hand against thy proper hart;
To th'end that when thou wast in greatest hight
  To greatnes growne, through long prosperitie,
  Thou then adowne might'st fall more horriblie.
[XXXI. 10.--_Aemathian fields_. Thessalian fields; alluding to the
battle fought at Pharsalia, in Thessaly, between Caesar and Pompey. H.]


XXXII.

Hope ye, my Verses, that posteritie
Of age ensuing shall you ever read?
Hope ye that ever immortalitie
So meane harpes worke may chalenge for her meed?
If under heaven anie endurance were,
These moniments, which not in paper writ,
But in porphyre and marble doo appeare,
Might well have hop'd to have obtained it.
Nath'les, my Lute, whom Phoebus deigned to give,
Cease not to sound these olde antiquities:
For if that Time doo let thy glorie live,
Well maist thou boast, how ever base thou bee,
  That thou art first which of thy nation song
  Th'olde honour of the people gowned long.


L'ENVOY.

Bellay, first garland of free poesie
That France brought forth, though fruitfull of brave wits,
Well worthie thou of immortalitie,
That long hast traveld*, by thy learned writs,
Olde Rome out of her ashes to revive,
And give a second life to dead decayes!
Needes must he all eternitie survive,
That can to other give eternall dayes.
Thy dayes therefore are endles, and thy prayse
Excelling all that ever went before:
And, after thee, gins Bartas hie to rayse
His heavenly Muse, th'Almightie to adore.
  Live happie spirits, th'honour of your name,
  And fill the world with never dying fame!
[* _Traveld_, travailed, toiled.]

L'Envoy, 11.--_Bartas_. Guillaume de Salluste du Bartas, a French poet
of the time of Henry IV, of extraordinary popularity in his day. His
poem on the Creation is said to have been reprinted more than thirty
times in six years, and was translated into several languages; among
others, into English by Joshua Sylvester. H.




MUIOPOTMOS:



OR



THE FATE OF THE BUTTERFLIE.



BY ED. SP.





DEDICATED TO THE MOST FAIRE AND VERTUOUS LADIE,

THE LADIE CAREY.




LONDON:

IMPRINTED FOR WILLIAM PONSONBIE, DWELLING IN PAULES

CHURCHYARD AT THE SIGNE OF THE BISHOPS HEAD.


1590*


[* This date seems to be an error for 1591; or, as Mr. Craik suggests,
it may have been used designedly with reference to real events, not yet
ascertained, which furnished the subject of this very pleasing
allegory. The Visions of the Worlds Vanitie, which follow this piece,
may be suspected of a similar application. C.]


TO THE RIGHT WORTHY AND VERTUOUS LADIE, THE LA: CAREY.


Most brave and bountifull La: for so excellent favours as I have
received at your sweet handes, to offer these fewe leaves as in
recompence, should be as to offer flowers to the gods for their divine
benefites. Therefore I have determined to give my selfe wholy to you,
as quite abandoned from my selfe, and absolutely vowed to your
services: which in all right is ever held for full recompence of debt
or damage, to have the person yeelded. My person I wot wel how little
worth it is. But the faithfull minde and humble zeale which I bear unto
your La: may perhaps be more of price, as may please you to account and
use the poore service thereof; which taketh glory to advance your
excellent partes and noble vertues, and to spend it selfe in honouring
you; not so much for your great bounty to my self, which yet may not be
unminded; nor for name or kindreds* sake by you vouchsafed, beeing
also regardable; as for that honorable name, which yee have by your
brave deserts purchast to your self, and spred in the mouths of al men:
with which I have also presumed to grace my verses, and, under your
name, to commend to the world this smal poeme; the which beseeching
your La: to take in worth, and of all things therein according to your
wonted graciousnes to make a milde construction, I humbly pray for your
happines.

Your La: ever

humbly,

E. S.

[Footnote: "This lady was Elizabeth, one of the six daughters of Sir
John Spencer, of Althorpe, in Northamptonshire, and was married to Sir
George Carey, who became Lord Hunsdon on the death of his father, in
1596."--TODD.]


