

ENDYMION:

A Poetic Romance.


BY JOHN KEATS.

"THE STRETCHED METRE OF AN ANTIQUE SONG."

LONDON:
PRINTED FOR TAYLOR AND HESSEY,
93, FLEET STREET.
1818.

INSCRIBED TO THE MEMORY OF THOMAS CHATTERTON.




PREFACE.


Knowing within myself the manner in which this Poem has been
produced, it is not without a feeling of regret that I make it
public.

What manner I mean, will be quite clear to the reader, who must soon
perceive great inexperience, immaturity, and every error denoting a
feverish attempt, rather than a deed accomplished. The two first
books, and indeed the two last, I feel sensible are not of such
completion as to warrant their passing the press; nor should they if
I thought a year's castigation would do them any good;--it will not:
the foundations are too sandy. It is just that this youngster should
die away: a sad thought for me, if I had not some hope that while it
is dwindling I may be plotting, and fitting myself for verses fit to
live.

This may be speaking too presumptuously, and may deserve a
punishment: but no feeling man will be forward to inflict it: he will
leave me alone, with the conviction that there is not a fiercer hell
than the failure in a great object. This is not written with the
least atom of purpose to forestall criticisms of course, but from the
desire I have to conciliate men who are competent to look, and who do
look with a zealous eye, to the honour of English literature.

The imagination of a boy is healthy, and the mature imagination of a
man is healthy; but there is a space of life between, in which the
soul is in a ferment, the character undecided, the way of life
uncertain, the ambition thick-sighted: thence proceeds mawkishness,
and all the thousand bitters which those men I speak of must
necessarily taste in going over the following pages.

I hope I have not in too late a day touched the beautiful mythology
of Greece, and dulled its brightness: for I wish to try once more,
before I bid it farewel.

  _Teignmouth,
  April 10, 1818._




ERRATUM.


Page 108, line 4 from the bottom, for "her" read "his."




ENDYMION.

BOOK I.


  A thing of beauty is a joy for ever:
  Its loveliness increases; it will never
  Pass into nothingness; but still will keep
  A bower quiet for us, and a sleep
  Full of sweet dreams, and health, and quiet breathing.
  Therefore, on every morrow, are we wreathing
  A flowery band to bind us to the earth,
  Spite of despondence, of the inhuman dearth
  Of noble natures, of the gloomy days,
  Of all the unhealthy and o'er-darkened ways                    10
  Made for our searching: yes, in spite of all,
  Some shape of beauty moves away the pall
  From our dark spirits. Such the sun, the moon,
  Trees old and young, sprouting a shady boon
  For simple sheep; and such are daffodils
  With the green world they live in; and clear rills
  That for themselves a cooling covert make
  'Gainst the hot season; the mid forest brake,
  Rich with a sprinkling of fair musk-rose blooms:
  And such too is the grandeur of the dooms                      20
  We have imagined for the mighty dead;
  All lovely tales that we have heard or read:
  An endless fountain of immortal drink,
  Pouring unto us from the heaven's brink.

    Nor do we merely feel these essences
  For one short hour; no, even as the trees
  That whisper round a temple become soon
  Dear as the temple's self, so does the moon,
  The passion poesy, glories infinite,
  Haunt us till they become a cheering light                     30
  Unto our souls, and bound to us so fast,
  That, whether there be shine, or gloom o'ercast,
  They alway must be with us, or we die.

    Therefore, 'tis with full happiness that I
  Will trace the story of Endymion.
  The very music of the name has gone
  Into my being, and each pleasant scene
  Is growing fresh before me as the green
  Of our own vallies: so I will begin
  Now while I cannot hear the city's din;                        40
  Now while the early budders are just new,
  And run in mazes of the youngest hue
  About old forests; while the willow trails
  Its delicate amber; and the dairy pails
  Bring home increase of milk. And, as the year
  Grows lush in juicy stalks, I'll smoothly steer
  My little boat, for many quiet hours,
  With streams that deepen freshly into bowers.
  Many and many a verse I hope to write,
  Before the daisies, vermeil rimm'd and white,                  50
  Hide in deep herbage; and ere yet the bees
  Hum about globes of clover and sweet peas,
  I must be near the middle of my story.
  O may no wintry season, bare and hoary,
  See it half finished: but let Autumn bold,
  With universal tinge of sober gold,
  Be all about me when I make an end.
  And now at once, adventuresome, I send
  My herald thought into a wilderness:
  There let its trumpet blow, and quickly dress                  60
  My uncertain path with green, that I may speed
  Easily onward, thorough flowers and weed.

    Upon the sides of Latmos was outspread
  A mighty forest; for the moist earth fed
  So plenteously all weed-hidden roots
  Into o'er-hanging boughs, and precious fruits.
  And it had gloomy shades, sequestered deep,
  Where no man went; and if from shepherd's keep
  A lamb strayed far a-down those inmost glens,
  Never again saw he the happy pens                              70
  Whither his brethren, bleating with content,
  Over the hills at every nightfall went.
  Among the shepherds, 'twas believed ever,
  That not one fleecy lamb which thus did sever
  From the white flock, but pass'd unworried
  By angry wolf, or pard with prying head,
  Until it came to some unfooted plains
  Where fed the herds of Pan: ay great his gains
  Who thus one lamb did lose. Paths there were many,
  Winding through palmy fern, and rushes fenny,                  80
  And ivy banks; all leading pleasantly
  To a wide lawn, whence one could only see
  Stems thronging all around between the swell
  Of turf and slanting branches: who could tell
  The freshness of the space of heaven above,
  Edg'd round with dark tree tops? through which a dove
  Would often beat its wings, and often too
  A little cloud would move across the blue.

    Full in the middle of this pleasantness
  There stood a marble altar, with a tress                       90
  Of flowers budded newly; and the dew
  Had taken fairy phantasies to strew
  Daisies upon the sacred sward last eve,
  And so the dawned light in pomp receive.
  For 'twas the morn: Apollo's upward fire
  Made every eastern cloud a silvery pyre
  Of brightness so unsullied, that therein
  A melancholy spirit well might win
  Oblivion, and melt out his essence fine
  Into the winds: rain-scented eglantine                        100
  Gave temperate sweets to that well-wooing sun;
  The lark was lost in him; cold springs had run
  To warm their chilliest bubbles in the grass;
  Man's voice was on the mountains; and the mass
  Of nature's lives and wonders puls'd tenfold,
  To feel this sun-rise and its glories old.

    Now while the silent workings of the dawn
  Were busiest, into that self-same lawn
  All suddenly, with joyful cries, there sped
  A troop of little children garlanded;                         110
  Who gathering round the altar, seemed to pry
  Earnestly round as wishing to espy
  Some folk of holiday: nor had they waited
  For many moments, ere their ears were sated
  With a faint breath of music, which ev'n then
  Fill'd out its voice, and died away again.
  Within a little space again it gave
  Its airy swellings, with a gentle wave,
  To light-hung leaves, in smoothest echoes breaking
  Through copse-clad vallies,--ere their death, o'ertaking
  The surgy murmurs of the lonely sea.                          121

    And now, as deep into the wood as we
  Might mark a lynx's eye, there glimmered light
  Fair faces and a rush of garments white,
  Plainer and plainer shewing, till at last
  Into the widest alley they all past,
  Making directly for the woodland altar.
  O kindly muse! let not my weak tongue faulter
  In telling of this goodly company,
  Of their old piety, and of their glee:                        130
  But let a portion of ethereal dew
  Fall on my head, and presently unmew
  My soul; that I may dare, in wayfaring,
  To stammer where old Chaucer used to sing.

    Leading the way, young damsels danced along,
  Bearing the burden of a shepherd song;
  Each having a white wicker over brimm'd
  With April's tender younglings: next, well trimm'd,
  A crowd of shepherds with as sunburnt looks
  As may be read of in Arcadian books;                          140
  Such as sat listening round Apollo's pipe,
  When the great deity, for earth too ripe,
  Let his divinity o'er-flowing die
  In music, through the vales of Thessaly:
  Some idly trailed their sheep-hooks on the ground,
  And some kept up a shrilly mellow sound
  With ebon-tipped flutes: close after these,
  Now coming from beneath the forest trees,
  A venerable priest full soberly,
  Begirt with ministring looks: alway his eye                   150
  Stedfast upon the matted turf he kept,
  And after him his sacred vestments swept.
  From his right hand there swung a vase, milk-white,
  Of mingled wine, out-sparkling generous light;
  And in his left he held a basket full
  Of all sweet herbs that searching eye could cull:
  Wild thyme, and valley-lilies whiter still
  Than Leda's love, and cresses from the rill.
  His aged head, crowned with beechen wreath,
  Seem'd like a poll of ivy in the teeth                        160
  Of winter hoar. Then came another crowd
  Of shepherds, lifting in due time aloud
  Their share of the ditty. After them appear'd,
  Up-followed by a multitude that rear'd
  Their voices to the clouds, a fair wrought car,
  Easily rolling so as scarce to mar
  The freedom of three steeds of dapple brown:
  Who stood therein did seem of great renown
  Among the throng. His youth was fully blown,
  Shewing like Ganymede to manhood grown;                       170
  And, for those simple times, his garments were
  A chieftain king's: beneath his breast, half bare,
  Was hung a silver bugle, and between
  His nervy knees there lay a boar-spear keen.
  A smile was on his countenance; he seem'd,
  To common lookers on, like one who dream'd
  Of idleness in groves Elysian:
  But there were some who feelingly could scan
  A lurking trouble in his nether lip,
  And see that oftentimes the reins would slip                  180
  Through his forgotten hands: then would they sigh,
  And think of yellow leaves, of owlets cry,
  Of logs piled solemnly.--Ah, well-a-day,
  Why should our young Endymion pine away!

    Soon the assembly, in a circle rang'd,
  Stood silent round the shrine: each look was chang'd
  To sudden veneration: women meek
  Beckon'd their sons to silence; while each cheek
  Of virgin bloom paled gently for slight fear.
  Endymion too, without a forest peer,                          190
  Stood, wan, and pale, and with an awed face,
  Among his brothers of the mountain chase.
  In midst of all, the venerable priest
  Eyed them with joy from greatest to the least,
  And, after lifting up his aged hands,
  Thus spake he: "Men of Latmos! shepherd bands!
  Whose care it is to guard a thousand flocks:
  Whether descended from beneath the rocks
  That overtop your mountains; whether come
  From vallies where the pipe is never dumb;                    200
  Or from your swelling downs, where sweet air stirs
  Blue hare-bells lightly, and where prickly furze
  Buds lavish gold; or ye, whose precious charge
  Nibble their fill at ocean's very marge,
  Whose mellow reeds are touch'd with sounds forlorn
  By the dim echoes of old Triton's horn:
  Mothers and wives! who day by day prepare
  The scrip, with needments, for the mountain air;
  And all ye gentle girls who foster up
  Udderless lambs, and in a little cup                          210
  Will put choice honey for a favoured youth:
  Yea, every one attend! for in good truth
  Our vows are wanting to our great god Pan.
  Are not our lowing heifers sleeker than
  Night-swollen mushrooms? Are not our wide plains
  Speckled with countless fleeces? Have not rains
  Green'd over April's lap? No howling sad
  Sickens our fearful ewes; and we have had
  Great bounty from Endymion our lord.
  The earth is glad: the merry lark has pour'd                  220
  His early song against yon breezy sky,
  That spreads so clear o'er our solemnity."

    Thus ending, on the shrine he heap'd a spire
  Of teeming sweets, enkindling sacred fire;
  Anon he stain'd the thick and spongy sod
  With wine, in honour of the shepherd-god.
  Now while the earth was drinking it, and while
  Bay leaves were crackling in the fragrant pile,
  And gummy frankincense was sparkling bright
  'Neath smothering parsley, and a hazy light                   230
  Spread greyly eastward, thus a chorus sang:

    "O THOU, whose mighty palace roof doth hang
  From jagged trunks, and overshadoweth
  Eternal whispers, glooms, the birth, life, death
  Of unseen flowers in heavy peacefulness;
  Who lov'st to see the hamadryads dress
  Their ruffled locks where meeting hazels darken;
  And through whole solemn hours dost sit, and hearken
  The dreary melody of bedded reeds--
  In desolate places, where dank moisture breeds                240
  The pipy hemlock to strange overgrowth;
  Bethinking thee, how melancholy loth
  Thou wast to lose fair Syrinx--do thou now,
  By thy love's milky brow!
  By all the trembling mazes that she ran,
  Hear us, great Pan!

    "O thou, for whose soul-soothing quiet, turtles
  Passion their voices cooingly 'mong myrtles,
  What time thou wanderest at eventide
  Through sunny meadows, that outskirt the side                 250
  Of thine enmossed realms: O thou, to whom
  Broad leaved fig trees even now foredoom
  Their ripen'd fruitage; yellow girted bees
  Their golden honeycombs; our village leas
  Their fairest blossom'd beans and poppied corn;
  The chuckling linnet its five young unborn,
  To sing for thee; low creeping strawberries
  Their summer coolness; pent up butterflies
  Their freckled wings; yea, the fresh budding year
  All its completions--be quickly near,                         260
  By every wind that nods the mountain pine,
  O forester divine!

    "Thou, to whom every fawn and satyr flies
  For willing service; whether to surprise
  The squatted hare while in half sleeping fit;
  Or upward ragged precipices flit
  To save poor lambkins from the eagle's maw;
  Or by mysterious enticement draw
  Bewildered shepherds to their path again;
  Or to tread breathless round the frothy main,                 270
  And gather up all fancifullest shells
  For thee to tumble into Naiads' cells,
  And, being hidden, laugh at their out-peeping;
  Or to delight thee with fantastic leaping,
  The while they pelt each other on the crown
  With silvery oak apples, and fir cones brown--
  By all the echoes that about thee ring,
  Hear us, O satyr king!

    "O Hearkener to the loud clapping shears,
  While ever and anon to his shorn peers                        280
  A ram goes bleating: Winder of the horn,
  When snouted wild-boars routing tender corn
  Anger our huntsman: Breather round our farms,
  To keep off mildews, and all weather harms:
  Strange ministrant of undescribed sounds,
  That come a swooning over hollow grounds,
  And wither drearily on barren moors:
  Dread opener of the mysterious doors
  Leading to universal knowledge--see,
  Great son of Dryope,                                          290
  The many that are come to pay their vows
  With leaves about their brows!

    Be still the unimaginable lodge
  For solitary thinkings; such as dodge
  Conception to the very bourne of heaven,
  Then leave the naked brain: be still the leaven,
  That spreading in this dull and clodded earth
  Gives it a touch ethereal--a new birth:
  Be still a symbol of immensity;
  A firmament reflected in a sea;                               300
  An element filling the space between;
  An unknown--but no more: we humbly screen
  With uplift hands our foreheads, lowly bending,
  And giving out a shout most heaven rending,
  Conjure thee to receive our humble Pæan,
  Upon thy Mount Lycean!

    Even while they brought the burden to a close,
  A shout from the whole multitude arose,
  That lingered in the air like dying rolls
  Of abrupt thunder, when Ionian shoals                         310
  Of dolphins bob their noses through the brine.
  Meantime, on shady levels, mossy fine,
  Young companies nimbly began dancing
  To the swift treble pipe, and humming string.
  Aye, those fair living forms swam heavenly
  To tunes forgotten--out of memory:
  Fair creatures! whose young childrens' children bred
  Thermopylæ its heroes--not yet dead,
  But in old marbles ever beautiful.
  High genitors, unconscious did they cull                      320
  Time's sweet first-fruits--they danc'd to weariness,
  And then in quiet circles did they press
  The hillock turf, and caught the latter end
  Of some strange history, potent to send
  A young mind from its bodily tenement.
  Or they might watch the quoit-pitchers, intent
  On either side; pitying the sad death
  Of Hyacinthus, when the cruel breath
  Of Zephyr slew him,--Zephyr penitent,
  Who now, ere Phœbus mounts the firmament,                     330
  Fondles the flower amid the sobbing rain.
  The archers too, upon a wider plain,
  Beside the feathery whizzing of the shaft,
  And the dull twanging bowstring, and the raft
  Branch down sweeping from a tall ash top,
  Call'd up a thousand thoughts to envelope
  Those who would watch. Perhaps, the trembling knee
  And frantic gape of lonely Niobe,
  Poor, lonely Niobe! when her lovely young
  Were dead and gone, and her caressing tongue                  340
  Lay a lost thing upon her paly lip,
  And very, very deadliness did nip
  Her motherly cheeks. Arous'd from this sad mood
  By one, who at a distance loud halloo'd,
  Uplifting his strong bow into the air,
  Many might after brighter visions stare:
  After the Argonauts, in blind amaze
  Tossing about on Neptune's restless ways,
  Until, from the horizon's vaulted side,
  There shot a golden splendour far and wide,                   350
  Spangling those million poutings of the brine
  With quivering ore: 'twas even an awful shine
  From the exaltation of Apollo's bow;
  A heavenly beacon in their dreary woe.
  Who thus were ripe for high contemplating,
  Might turn their steps towards the sober ring
  Where sat Endymion and the aged priest
  'Mong shepherds gone in eld, whose looks increas'd
  The silvery setting of their mortal star.
  There they discours'd upon the fragile bar                    360
  That keeps us from our homes ethereal;
  And what our duties there: to nightly call
  Vesper, the beauty-crest of summer weather;
  To summon all the downiest clouds together
  For the sun's purple couch; to emulate
  In ministring the potent rule of fate
  With speed of fire-tailed exhalations;
  To tint her pallid cheek with bloom, who cons
  Sweet poesy by moonlight: besides these,
  A world of other unguess'd offices.                           370
  Anon they wander'd, by divine converse,
  Into Elysium; vieing to rehearse
  Each one his own anticipated bliss.
  One felt heart-certain that he could not miss
  His quick gone love, among fair blossom'd boughs,
  Where every zephyr-sigh pouts, and endows
  Her lips with music for the welcoming.
  Another wish'd, mid that eternal spring,
  To meet his rosy child, with feathery sails,
  Sweeping, eye-earnestly, through almond vales:                380
  Who, suddenly, should stoop through the smooth wind,
  And with the balmiest leaves his temples bind;
  And, ever after, through those regions be
  His messenger, his little Mercury,
  Some were athirst in soul to see again
  Their fellow huntsmen o'er the wide champaign
  In times long past; to sit with them, and talk
  Of all the chances in their earthly walk;
  Comparing, joyfully, their plenteous stores
  Of happiness, to when upon the moors,                         390
  Benighted, close they huddled from the cold,
  And shar'd their famish'd scrips. Thus all out-told
  Their fond imaginations,--saving him
  Whose eyelids curtain'd up their jewels dim,
  Endymion: yet hourly had he striven
  To hide the cankering venom, that had riven
  His fainting recollections. Now indeed
  His senses had swoon'd off: he did not heed
  The sudden silence, or the whispers low,
  Or the old eyes dissolving at his woe,                        400
  Or anxious calls, or close of trembling palms,
  Or maiden's sigh, that grief itself embalms:
  But in the self-same fixed trance he kept,
  Like one who on the earth had never slept.
  Aye, even as dead-still as a marble man,
  Frozen in that old tale Arabian.

    Who whispers him so pantingly and close?
  Peona, his sweet sister: of all those,
  His friends, the dearest. Hushing signs she made,
  And breath'd a sister's sorrow to persuade                    410
  A yielding up, a cradling on her care.
  Her eloquence did breathe away the curse:
  She led him, like some midnight spirit nurse
  Of happy changes in emphatic dreams,
  Along a path between two little streams,--
  Guarding his forehead, with her round elbow,
  From low-grown branches, and his footsteps slow
  From stumbling over stumps and hillocks small;
  Until they came to where these streamlets fall,
  With mingled bubblings and a gentle rush,                     420
  Into a river, clear, brimful, and flush
  With crystal mocking of the trees and sky.
  A little shallop, floating there hard by,
  Pointed its beak over the fringed bank;
  And soon it lightly dipt, and rose, and sank,
  And dipt again, with the young couple's weight,--
  Peona guiding, through the water straight,
  Towards a bowery island opposite;
  Which gaining presently, she steered light
  Into a shady, fresh, and ripply cove,                         430
  Where nested was an arbour, overwove
  By many a summer's silent fingering;
  To whose cool bosom she was used to bring
  Her playmates, with their needle broidery,
  And minstrel memories of times gone by.

    So she was gently glad to see him laid
  Under her favourite bower's quiet shade,
  On her own couch, new made of flower leaves,
  Dried carefully on the cooler side of sheaves
  When last the sun his autumn tresses shook,                   440
  And the tann'd harvesters rich armfuls took.
  Soon was he quieted to slumbrous rest:
  But, ere it crept upon him, he had prest
  Peona's busy hand against his lips,
  And still, a sleeping, held her finger-tips
  In tender pressure. And as a willow keeps
  A patient watch over the stream that creeps
  Windingly by it, so the quiet maid
  Held her in peace: so that a whispering blade
  Of grass, a wailful gnat, a bee bustling                      450
  Down in the blue-bells, or a wren light rustling
  Among sere leaves and twigs, might all be heard.

    O magic sleep! O comfortable bird,
  That broodest o'er the troubled sea of the mind
  Till it is hush'd and smooth! O unconfin'd
  Restraint! imprisoned liberty! great key
  To golden palaces, strange minstrelsy,
  Fountains grotesque, new trees, bespangled caves,
  Echoing grottos, full of tumbling waves
  And moonlight; aye, to all the mazy world                     460
  Of silvery enchantment!--who, upfurl'd
  Beneath thy drowsy wing a triple hour,
  But renovates and lives?--Thus, in the bower,
  Endymion was calm'd to life again.
  Opening his eyelids with a healthier brain,
  He said: "I feel this thine endearing love
  All through my bosom: thou art as a dove
  Trembling its closed eyes and sleeked wings
  About me; and the pearliest dew not brings
  Such morning incense from the fields of May,                  470
  As do those brighter drops that twinkling stray
  From those kind eyes,--the very home and haunt
  Of sisterly affection. Can I want
  Aught else, aught nearer heaven, than such tears?
  Yet dry them up, in bidding hence all fears
  That, any longer, I will pass my days
  Alone and sad. No, I will once more raise
  My voice upon the mountain-heights; once more
  Make my horn parley from their foreheads hoar:
  Again my trooping hounds their tongues shall loll             480
  Around the breathed boar: again I'll poll
  The fair-grown yew tree, for a chosen bow:
  And, when the pleasant sun is getting low,
  Again I'll linger in a sloping mead
  To hear the speckled thrushes, and see feed
  Our idle sheep. So be thou cheered sweet,
  And, if thy lute is here, softly intreat
  My soul to keep in its resolved course."

    Hereat Peona, in their silver source,
  Shut her pure sorrow drops with glad exclaim,                 490
  And took a lute, from which there pulsing came
  A lively prelude, fashioning the way
  In which her voice should wander. 'Twas a lay
  More subtle cadenced, more forest wild
  Than Dryope's lone lulling of her child;
  And nothing since has floated in the air
  So mournful strange. Surely some influence rare
  Went, spiritual, through the damsel's hand;
  For still, with Delphic emphasis, she spann'd
  The quick invisible strings, even though she saw              500
  Endymion's spirit melt away and thaw
  Before the deep intoxication.
  But soon she came, with sudden burst, upon
  Her self-possession--swung the lute aside,
  And earnestly said: "Brother, 'tis vain to hide
  That thou dost know of things mysterious,
  Immortal, starry; such alone could thus
  Weigh down thy nature. Hast thou sinn'd in aught
  Offensive to the heavenly powers? Caught
  A Paphian dove upon a message sent?                           510
  Thy deathful bow against some deer-herd bent,
  Sacred to Dian? Haply, thou hast seen
  Her naked limbs among the alders green;
  And that, alas! is death. No, I can trace
  Something more high perplexing in thy face!"

    Endymion look'd at her, and press'd her hand,
  And said, "Art thou so pale, who wast so bland
  And merry in our meadows? How is this?
  Tell me thine ailment: tell me all amiss!--
  Ah! thou hast been unhappy at the change                      520
  Wrought suddenly in me. What indeed more strange?
  Or more complete to overwhelm surmise?
  Ambition is no sluggard: 'tis no prize,
  That toiling years would put within my grasp,
  That I have sigh'd for: with so deadly gasp
  No man e'er panted for a mortal love.
  So all have set my heavier grief above
  These things which happen. Rightly have they done:
  I, who still saw the horizontal sun
  Heave his broad shoulder o'er the edge of the world,          530
  Out-facing Lucifer, and then had hurl'd
  My spear aloft, as signal for the chace--
  I, who, for very sport of heart, would race
  With my own steed from Araby; pluck down
  A vulture from his towery perching; frown
  A lion into growling, loth retire--
  To lose, at once, all my toil breeding fire,
  And sink thus low! but I will ease my breast
  Of secret grief, here in this bowery nest.

    "This river does not see the naked sky,                     540
  Till it begins to progress silverly
  Around the western border of the wood,
  Whence, from a certain spot, its winding flood
  Seems at the distance like a crescent moon:
  And in that nook, the very pride of June,
  Had I been used to pass my weary eves;
  The rather for the sun unwilling leaves
  So dear a picture of his sovereign power,
  And I could witness his most kingly hour,
  When he doth lighten up the golden reins,                     550
  And paces leisurely down amber plains
  His snorting four. Now when his chariot last
  Its beams against the zodiac-lion cast,
  There blossom'd suddenly a magic bed
  Of sacred ditamy, and poppies red:
  At which I wondered greatly, knowing well
  That but one night had wrought this flowery spell;
  And, sitting down close by, began to muse
  What it might mean. Perhaps, thought I, Morpheus,
  In passing here, his owlet pinions shook;                     560
  Or, it may be, ere matron Night uptook
  Her ebon urn, young Mercury, by stealth,
  Had dipt his rod in it: such garland wealth
  Came not by common growth. Thus on I thought,
  Until my head was dizzy and distraught.
  Moreover, through the dancing poppies stole
  A breeze, most softly lulling to my soul;
  And shaping visions all about my sight
  Of colours, wings, and bursts of spangly light;
  The which became more strange, and strange, and dim,
  And then were gulph'd in a tumultuous swim:                   571
  And then I fell asleep. Ah, can I tell
  The enchantment that afterwards befel?
  Yet it was but a dream: yet such a dream
  That never tongue, although it overteem
  With mellow utterance, like a cavern spring,
  Could figure out and to conception bring
  All I beheld and felt. Methought I lay
  Watching the zenith, where the milky way
  Among the stars in virgin splendour pours;                    580
  And travelling my eye, until the doors
  Of heaven appear'd to open for my flight,
  I became loth and fearful to alight
  From such high soaring by a downward glance:
  So kept me stedfast in that airy trance,
  Spreading imaginary pinions wide.
  When, presently, the stars began to glide,
  And faint away, before my eager view:
  At which I sigh'd that I could not pursue,
  And dropt my vision to the horizon's verge;                   590
  And lo! from opening clouds, I saw emerge
  The loveliest moon, that ever silver'd o'er
  A shell for Neptune's goblet: she did soar
  So passionately bright, my dazzled soul
  Commingling with her argent spheres did roll
  Through clear and cloudy, even when she went
  At last into a dark and vapoury tent--
  Whereat, methought, the lidless-eyed train
  Of planets all were in the blue again.
  To commune with those orbs, once more I rais'd                600
  My sight right upward: but it was quite dazed
  By a bright something, sailing down apace,
  Making me quickly veil my eyes and face:
  Again I look'd, and, O ye deities,
  Who from Olympus watch our destinies!
  Whence that completed form of all completeness?
  Whence came that high perfection of all sweetness?
  Speak, stubborn earth, and tell me where, O where
  Hast thou a symbol of her golden hair?
  Not oat-sheaves drooping in the western sun;                  610
  Not--thy soft hand, fair sister! let me shun
  Such follying before thee--yet she had,
  Indeed, locks bright enough to make me mad;
  And they were simply gordian'd up and braided,
  Leaving, in naked comeliness, unshaded,
  Her pearl round ears, white neck, and orbed brow;
  The which were blended in, I know not how,
  With such a paradise of lips and eyes,
  Blush-tinted cheeks, half smiles, and faintest sighs,
  That, when I think thereon, my spirit clings                  620
  And plays about its fancy, till the stings
  Of human neighbourhood envenom all.
  Unto what awful power shall I call?
  To what high fane?--Ah! see her hovering feet,
  More bluely vein'd, more soft, more whitely sweet
  Than those of sea-born Venus, when she rose
  From out her cradle shell. The wind out-blows
  Her scarf into a fluttering pavilion;
  'Tis blue, and over-spangled with a million
  Of little eyes, as though thou wert to shed,                  630
  Over the darkest, lushest blue-bell bed,
  Handfuls of daisies."--"Endymion, how strange!
  Dream within dream!"--"She took an airy range,
  And then, towards me, like a very maid,
  Came blushing, waning, willing, and afraid,
  And press'd me by the hand: Ah! 'twas too much;
  Methought I fainted at the charmed touch,
  Yet held my recollection, even as one
  Who dives three fathoms where the waters run
  Gurgling in beds of coral: for anon,                          640
  I felt upmounted in that region
  Where falling stars dart their artillery forth,
  And eagles struggle with the buffeting north
  That balances the heavy meteor-stone;--
  Felt too, I was not fearful, nor alone,
  But lapp'd and lull'd along the dangerous sky.
  Soon, as it seem'd, we left our journeying high,
  And straightway into frightful eddies swoop'd;
  Such as ay muster where grey time has scoop'd
  Huge dens and caverns in a mountain's side:                   650
  There hollow sounds arous'd me, and I sigh'd
  To faint once more by looking on my bliss--
  I was distracted; madly did I kiss
  The wooing arms which held me, and did give
  My eyes at once to death: but 'twas to live,
  To take in draughts of life from the gold fount
  Of kind and passionate looks; to count, and count
  The moments, by some greedy help that seem'd
  A second self, that each might be redeem'd
  And plunder'd of its load of blessedness.                     660
  Ah, desperate mortal! I ev'n dar'd to press
  Her very cheek against my crowned lip,
  And, at that moment, felt my body dip
  Into a warmer air: a moment more,
  Our feet were soft in flowers. There was store
  Of newest joys upon that alp. Sometimes
  A scent of violets, and blossoming limes,
  Loiter'd around us; then of honey cells,
  Made delicate from all white-flower bells;
  And once, above the edges of our nest,                        670
  An arch face peep'd,--an Oread as I guess'd.

    "Why did I dream that sleep o'er-power'd me
  In midst of all this heaven? Why not see,
  Far off, the shadows of his pinions dark,
  And stare them from me? But no, like a spark
  That needs must die, although its little beam
  Reflects upon a diamond, my sweet dream
  Fell into nothing--into stupid sleep.
  And so it was, until a gentle creep,
  A careful moving caught my waking ears,                       680
  And up I started: Ah! my sighs, my tears,
  My clenched hands;--for lo! the poppies hung
  Dew-dabbled on their stalks, the ouzel sung
  A heavy ditty, and the sullen day
  Had chidden herald Hesperus away,
  With leaden looks: the solitary breeze
  Bluster'd, and slept, and its wild self did teaze
  With wayward melancholy; and I thought,
  Mark me, Peona! that sometimes it brought
  Faint fare-thee-wells, and sigh-shrilled adieus!--            690
  Away I wander'd--all the pleasant hues
  Of heaven and earth had faded: deepest shades
  Were deepest dungeons; heaths and sunny glades
  Were full of pestilent light; our taintless rills
  Seem'd sooty, and o'er-spread with upturn'd gills
  Of dying fish; the vermeil rose had blown
  In frightful scarlet, and its thorns out-grown
  Like spiked aloe. If an innocent bird
  Before my heedless footsteps stirr'd, and stirr'd
  In little journeys, I beheld in it                            700
  A disguis'd demon, missioned to knit
  My soul with under darkness; to entice
  My stumblings down some monstrous precipice:
  Therefore I eager followed, and did curse
  The disappointment. Time, that aged nurse,
  Rock'd me to patience. Now, thank gentle heaven!
  These things, with all their comfortings, are given
  To my down-sunken hours, and with thee,
  Sweet sister, help to stem the ebbing sea
  Of weary life."                                               710

                   Thus ended he, and both
  Sat silent: for the maid was very loth
  To answer; feeling well that breathed words
  Would all be lost, unheard, and vain as swords
  Against the enchased crocodile, or leaps
  Of grasshoppers against the sun. She weeps,
  And wonders; struggles to devise some blame;
  To put on such a look as would say, _Shame
  On this poor weakness!_ but, for all her strife,
  She could as soon have crush'd away the life                  720
  From a sick dove. At length, to break the pause,
  She said with trembling chance: "Is this the cause?
  This all? Yet it is strange, and sad, alas!
  That one who through this middle earth should pass
  Most like a sojourning demi-god, and leave
  His name upon the harp-string, should achieve
  No higher bard than simple maidenhood,
  Singing alone, and fearfully,--how the blood
  Left his young cheek; and how he used to stray
  He knew not where; and how he would say, _nay_,               730
  If any said 'twas love: and yet 'twas love;
  What could it be but love? How a ring-dove
  Let fall a sprig of yew tree in his path;
  And how he died: and then, that love doth scathe,
  The gentle heart, as northern blasts do roses;
  And then the ballad of his sad life closes
  With sighs, and an alas!--Endymion!
  Be rather in the trumpet's mouth,--anon
  Among the winds at large--that all may hearken!
  Although, before the crystal heavens darken,                  740
  I watch and dote upon the silver lakes
  Pictur'd in western cloudiness, that takes
  The semblance of gold rocks and bright gold sands,
  Islands, and creeks, and amber-fretted strands
  With horses prancing o'er them, palaces
  And towers of amethyst,--would I so tease
  My pleasant days, because I could not mount
  Into those regions? The Morphean fount
  Of that fine element that visions, dreams,
  And fitful whims of sleep are made of, streams                750
  Into its airy channels with so subtle,
  So thin a breathing, not the spider's shuttle,
  Circled a million times within the space
  Of a swallow's nest-door, could delay a trace,
  A tinting of its quality: how light
  Must dreams themselves be; seeing they're more slight
  Than the mere nothing that engenders them!
  Then wherefore sully the entrusted gem
  Of high and noble life with thoughts so sick?
  Why pierce high-fronted honour to the quick                   760
  For nothing but a dream?" Hereat the youth
  Look'd up: a conflicting of shame and ruth
  Was in his plaited brow: yet, his eyelids
  Widened a little, as when Zephyr bids
  A little breeze to creep between the fans
  Of careless butterflies: amid his pains
  He seem'd to taste a drop of manna-dew,
  Full palatable; and a colour grew
  Upon his cheek, while thus he lifeful spake.

    "Peona! ever have I long'd to slake                         770
  My thirst for the world's praises: nothing base,
  No merely slumberous phantasm, could unlace
  The stubborn canvas for my voyage prepar'd--
  Though now 'tis tatter'd; leaving my bark bar'd
  And sullenly drifting: yet my higher hope
  Is of too wide, too rainbow-large a scope,
  To fret at myriads of earthly wrecks.
  Wherein lies happiness? In that which becks
  Our ready minds to fellowship divine,
  A fellowship with essence; till we shine,                     780
  Full alchemiz'd, and free of space. Behold
  The clear religion of heaven! Fold
  A rose leaf round thy finger's taperness,
  And soothe thy lips: hist, when the airy stress
  Of music's kiss impregnates the free winds,
  And with a sympathetic touch unbinds
  Eolian magic from their lucid wombs:
  Then old songs waken from enclouded tombs;
  Old ditties sigh above their father's grave;
  Ghosts of melodious prophecyings rave                         790
  Round every spot were trod Apollo's foot;
  Bronze clarions awake, and faintly bruit,
  Where long ago a giant battle was;
  And, from the turf, a lullaby doth pass
  In every place where infant Orpheus slept.
  Feel we these things?--that moment have we stept
  Into a sort of oneness, and our state
  Is like a floating spirit's. But there are
  Richer entanglements, enthralments far
  More self-destroying, leading, by degrees,                    800
  To the chief intensity: the crown of these
  Is made of love and friendship, and sits high
  Upon the forehead of humanity.
  All its more ponderous and bulky worth
  Is friendship, whence there ever issues forth
  A steady splendour; but at the tip-top,
  There hangs by unseen film, an orbed drop
  Of light, and that is love: its influence,
  Thrown in our eyes, genders a novel sense,
  At which we start and fret; till in the end,                  810
  Melting into its radiance, we blend,
  Mingle, and so become a part of it,--
  Nor with aught else can our souls interknit
  So wingedly: when we combine therewith,
  Life's self is nourish'd by its proper pith,
  And we are nurtured like a pelican brood.
  Aye, so delicious is the unsating food,
  That men, who might have tower'd in the van
  Of all the congregated world, to fan
  And winnow from the coming step of time                       820
  All chaff of custom, wipe away all slime
  Left by men-slugs and human serpentry,
  Have been content to let occasion die,
  Whilst they did sleep in love's elysium.
  And, truly, I would rather be struck dumb,
  Than speak against this ardent listlessness:
  For I have ever thought that it might bless
  The world with benefits unknowingly;
  As does the nightingale, upperched high,
  And cloister'd among cool and bunched leaves--                830
  She sings but to her love, nor e'er conceives
  How tiptoe Night holds back her dark-grey hood.
  Just so may love, although 'tis understood
  The mere commingling of passionate breath,
  Produce more than our searching witnesseth:
  What I know not: but who, of men, can tell
  That flowers would bloom, or that green fruit would swell
  To melting pulp, that fish would have bright mail,
  The earth its dower of river, wood, and vale,
  The meadows runnels, runnels pebble-stones,                   840
  The seed its harvest, or the lute its tones,
  Tones ravishment, or ravishment its sweet,
  If human souls did never kiss and greet?

    "Now, if this earthly love has power to make
  Men's being mortal, immortal; to shake
  Ambition from their memories, and brim
  Their measure of content; what merest whim,
  Seems all this poor endeavour after fame,
  To one, who keeps within his stedfast aim
  A love immortal, an immortal too.                             850
  Look not so wilder'd; for these things are true,
  And never can be born of atomies
  That buzz about our slumbers, like brain-flies,
  Leaving us fancy-sick. No, no, I'm sure,
  My restless spirit never could endure
  To brood so long upon one luxury,
  Unless it did, though fearfully, espy
  A hope beyond the shadow of a dream.
  My sayings will the less obscured seem,
  When I have told thee how my waking sight                     860
  Has made me scruple whether that same night
  Was pass'd in dreaming. Hearken, sweet Peona!
  Beyond the matron-temple of Latona,
  Which we should see but for these darkening boughs,
  Lies a deep hollow, from whose ragged brows
  Bushes and trees do lean all round athwart,
  And meet so nearly, that with wings outraught,
  And spreaded tail, a vulture could not glide
  Past them, but he must brush on every side.
  Some moulder'd steps lead into this cool cell,                870
  Far as the slabbed margin of a well,
  Whose patient level peeps its crystal eye
  Right upward, through the bushes, to the sky.
  Oft have I brought thee flowers, on their stalks set
  Like vestal primroses, but dark velvet
  Edges them round, and they have golden pits:
  'Twas there I got them, from the gaps and slits
  In a mossy stone, that sometimes was my seat,
  When all above was faint with mid-day heat.
  And there in strife no burning thoughts to heed,              880
  I'd bubble up the water through a reed;
  So reaching back to boy-hood: make me ships
  Of moulted feathers, touchwood, alder chips,
  With leaves stuck in them; and the Neptune be
  Of their petty ocean. Oftener, heavily,
  When love-lorn hours had left me less a child,
  I sat contemplating the figures wild
  Of o'er-head clouds melting the mirror through.
  Upon a day, while thus I watch'd, by flew
  A cloudy Cupid, with his bow and quiver;                      890
  So plainly character'd, no breeze would shiver
  The happy chance: so happy, I was fain
  To follow it upon the open plain,
  And, therefore, was just going; when, behold!
  A wonder, fair as any I have told--
  The same bright face I tasted in my sleep,
  Smiling in the clear well. My heart did leap
  Through the cool depth.--It moved as if to flee--
  I started up, when lo! refreshfully,
  There came upon my face, in plenteous showers,                900
  Dew-drops, and dewy buds, and leaves, and flowers,
  Wrapping all objects from my smothered sight,
  Bathing my spirit in a new delight.
  Aye, such a breathless honey-feel of bliss
  Alone preserved me from the drear abyss
  Of death, for the fair form had gone again.
  Pleasure is oft a visitant; but pain
  Clings cruelly to us, like the gnawing sloth
  On the deer's tender haunches: late, and loth,
  'Tis scar'd away by slow returning pleasure.                  910
  How sickening, how dark the dreadful leisure
  Of weary days, made deeper exquisite,
  By a fore-knowledge of unslumbrous night!
  Like sorrow came upon me, heavier still,
  Than when I wander'd from the poppy hill:
  And a whole age of lingering moments crept
  Sluggishly by, ere more contentment swept
  Away at once the deadly yellow spleen.
  Yes, thrice have I this fair enchantment seen;
  Once more been tortured with renewed life.                    920
  When last the wintry gusts gave over strife
  With the conquering sun of spring, and left the skies
  Warm and serene, but yet with moistened eyes
  In pity of the shatter'd infant buds,--
  That time thou didst adorn, with amber studs,
  My hunting cap, because I laugh'd and smil'd,
  Chatted with thee, and many days exil'd
  All torment from my breast;--'twas even then,
  Straying about, yet, coop'd up in the den
  Of helpless discontent,--hurling my lance                     930
  From place to place, and following at chance,
  At last, by hap, through some young trees it struck,
  And, plashing among bedded pebbles, stuck
  In the middle of a brook,--whose silver ramble
  Down twenty little falls, through reeds and bramble,
  Tracing along, it brought me to a cave,
  Whence it ran brightly forth, and white did lave
  The nether sides of mossy stones and rock,--
  'Mong which it gurgled blythe adieus, to mock
  Its own sweet grief at parting. Overhead,                     940
  Hung a lush scene of drooping weeds, and spread
  Thick, as to curtain up some wood-nymph's home.
  "Ah! impious mortal, whither do I roam?"
  Said I, low voic'd: "Ah, whither! 'Tis the grot
  Of Proserpine, when Hell, obscure and hot,
  Doth her resign; and where her tender hands
  She dabbles, on the cool and sluicy sands:
  Or 'tis the cell of Echo, where she sits,
  And babbles thorough silence, till her wits
  Are gone in tender madness, and anon,                         950
  Faints into sleep, with many a dying tone
  Of sadness. O that she would take my vows,
  And breathe them sighingly among the boughs,
  To sue her gentle ears for whose fair head,
  Daily, I pluck sweet flowerets from their bed,
  And weave them dyingly--send honey-whispers
  Round every leaf, that all those gentle lispers
  May sigh my love unto her pitying!
  O charitable echo! hear, and sing
  This ditty to her!--tell her"--so I stay'd                    960
  My foolish tongue, and listening, half afraid,
  Stood stupefied with my own empty folly,
  And blushing for the freaks of melancholy.
  Salt tears were coming, when I heard my name
  Most fondly lipp'd, and then these accents came:
  "Endymion! the cave is secreter
  Than the isle of Delos. Echo hence shall stir
  No sighs but sigh-warm kisses, or light noise
  Of thy combing hand, the while it travelling cloys
  And trembles through my labyrinthine hair."                   970
  At that oppress'd I hurried in.--Ah! where
  Are those swift moments? Whither are they fled?
  I'll smile no more, Peona; nor will wed
  Sorrow the way to death; but patiently
  Bear up against it: so farewel, sad sigh;
  And come instead demurest meditation,
  To occupy me wholly, and to fashion
  My pilgrimage for the world's dusky brink.
  No more will I count over, link by link,
  My chain of grief: no longer strive to find                   980
  A half-forgetfulness in mountain wind
  Blustering about my ears: aye, thou shalt see,
  Dearest of sisters, what my life shall be;
  What a calm round of hours shall make my days.
  There is a paly flame of hope that plays
  Where'er I look: but yet, I'll say 'tis naught--
  And here I bid it die. Have not I caught,
  Already, a more healthy countenance?
  By this the sun is setting; we may chance
  Meet some of our near-dwellers with my car."                  990

    This said, he rose, faint-smiling like a star
  Through autumn mists, and took Peona's hand:
  They stept into the boat, and launch'd from land.




ENDYMION.

BOOK II.


  O sovereign power of love! O grief! O balm!
  All records, saving thine, come cool, and calm,
  And shadowy, through the mist of passed years:
  For others, good or bad, hatred and tears
  Have become indolent; but touching thine,
  One sigh doth echo, one poor sob doth pine,
  One kiss brings honey-dew from buried days.
  The woes of Troy, towers smothering o'er their blaze,
  Stiff-holden shields, far-piercing spears, keen blades,
  Struggling, and blood, and shrieks--all dimly fades            10
  Into some backward corner of the brain;
  Yet, in our very souls, we feel amain
  The close of Troilus and Cressid sweet.
  Hence, pageant history! hence, gilded cheat!
  Swart planet in the universe of deeds!
  Wide sea, that one continuous murmur breeds
  Along the pebbled shore of memory!
  Many old rotten-timber'd boats there be
  Upon thy vaporous bosom, magnified
  To goodly vessels; many a sail of pride,                       20
  And golden keel'd, is left unlaunch'd and dry.
  But wherefore this? What care, though owl did fly
  About the great Athenian admiral's mast?
  What care, though striding Alexander past
  The Indus with his Macedonian numbers?
  Though old Ulysses tortured from his slumbers
  The glutted Cyclops, what care?--Juliet leaning
  Amid her window-flowers,--sighing,--weaning
  Tenderly her fancy from its maiden snow,
  Doth more avail than these: the silver flow                    30
  Of Hero's tears, the swoon of Imogen,
  Fair Pastorella in the bandit's den,
  Are things to brood on with more ardency
  Than the death-day of empires. Fearfully
  Must such conviction come upon his head,
  Who, thus far, discontent, has dared to tread,
  Without one muse's smile, or kind behest,
  The path of love and poesy. But rest,
  In chaffing restlessness, is yet more drear
  Than to be crush'd, in striving to uprear                      40
  Love's standard on the battlements of song.
  So once more days and nights aid me along,
  Like legion'd soldiers.

                          Brain-sick shepherd prince,
  What promise hast thou faithful guarded since
  The day of sacrifice? Or, have new sorrows
  Come with the constant dawn upon thy morrows?
  Alas! 'tis his old grief. For many days,
  Has he been wandering in uncertain ways:
  Through wilderness, and woods of mossed oaks;                  50
  Counting his woe-worn minutes, by the strokes
  Of the lone woodcutter; and listening still,
  Hour after hour, to each lush-leav'd rill.
  Now he is sitting by a shady spring,
  And elbow-deep with feverous fingering
  Stems the upbursting cold: a wild rose tree
  Pavilions him in bloom, and he doth see
  A bud which snares his fancy: lo! but now
  He plucks it, dips its stalk in the water: how!
  It swells, it buds, it flowers beneath his sight;              60
  And, in the middle, there is softly pight
  A golden butterfly; upon whose wings
  There must be surely character'd strange things,
  For with wide eye he wonders, and smiles oft.

    Lightly this little herald flew aloft,
  Follow'd by glad Endymion's clasped hands:
  Onward it flies. From languor's sullen bands
  His limbs are loos'd, and eager, on he hies
  Dazzled to trace it in the sunny skies.
  It seem'd he flew, the way so easy was;                        70
  And like a new-born spirit did he pass
  Through the green evening quiet in the sun,
  O'er many a heath, through many a woodland dun,
  Through buried paths, where sleepy twilight dreams
  The summer time away. One track unseams
  A wooded cleft, and, far away, the blue
  Of ocean fades upon him; then, anew,
  He sinks adown a solitary glen,
  Where there was never sound of mortal men,
  Saving, perhaps, some snow-light cadences                      80
  Melting to silence, when upon the breeze
  Some holy bark let forth an anthem sweet,
  To cheer itself to Delphi. Still his feet
  Went swift beneath the merry-winged guide,
  Until it reached a splashing fountain's side
  That, near a cavern's mouth, for ever pour'd
  Unto the temperate air: then high it soar'd,
  And, downward, suddenly began to dip,
  As if, athirst with so much toil, 'twould sip
  The crystal spout-head: so it did, with touch                  90
  Most delicate, as though afraid to smutch
  Even with mealy gold the waters clear.
  But, at that very touch, to disappear
  So fairy-quick, was strange! Bewildered,
  Endymion sought around, and shook each bed
  Of covert flowers in vain; and then he flung
  Himself along the grass. What gentle tongue,
  What whisperer disturb'd his gloomy rest?
  It was a nymph uprisen to the breast
  In the fountain's pebbly margin, and she stood                100
  'Mong lilies, like the youngest of the brood.
  To him her dripping hand she softly kist,
  And anxiously began to plait and twist
  Her ringlets round her fingers, saying: "Youth!
  Too long, alas, hast thou starv'd on the ruth,
  The bitterness of love: too long indeed,
  Seeing thou art so gentle. Could I weed
  Thy soul of care, by heavens, I would offer
  All the bright riches of my crystal coffer
  To Amphitrite; all my clear-eyed fish,                        110
  Golden, or rainbow-sided, or purplish,
  Vermilion-tail'd, or finn'd with silvery gauze;
  Yea, or my veined pebble-floor, that draws
  A virgin light to the deep; my grotto-sands
  Tawny and gold, ooz'd slowly from far lands
  By my diligent springs; my level lilies, shells,
  My charming rod, my potent river spells;
  Yes, every thing, even to the pearly cup
  Meander gave me,--for I bubbled up
  To fainting creatures in a desert wild.                       120
  But woe is me, I am but as a child
  To gladden thee; and all I dare to say,
  Is, that I pity thee; that on this day
  I've been thy guide; that thou must wander far
  In other regions, past the scanty bar
  To mortal steps, before thou cans't be ta'en
  From every wasting sigh, from every pain,
  Into the gentle bosom of thy love.
  Why it is thus, one knows in heaven above:
  But, a poor Naiad, I guess not. Farewel!                      130
  I have a ditty for my hollow cell."

    Hereat, she vanished from Endymion's gaze,
  Who brooded o'er the water in amaze:
  The dashing fount pour'd on, and where its pool
  Lay, half asleep, in grass and rushes cool,
  Quick waterflies and gnats were sporting still,
  And fish were dimpling, as if good nor ill
  Had fallen out that hour. The wanderer,
  Holding his forehead, to keep off the burr
  Of smothering fancies, patiently sat down;                    140
  And, while beneath the evening's sleepy frown
  Glow-worms began to trim their starry lamps,
  Thus breath'd he to himself: "Whoso encamps
  To take a fancied city of delight,
  O what a wretch is he! and when 'tis his,
  After long toil and travelling, to miss
  The kernel of his hopes, how more than vile:
  Yet, for him there's refreshment even in toil;
  Another city doth he set about,
  Free from the smallest pebble-head of doubt                   150
  That he will seize on trickling honey-combs:
  Alas, he finds them dry; and then he foams,
  And onward to another city speeds.
  But this is human life: the war, the deeds,
  The disappointment, the anxiety,
  Imagination's struggles, far and nigh,
  All human; bearing in themselves this good,
  That they are still the air, the subtle food,
  To make us feel existence, and to shew
  How quiet death is. Where soil is men grow,                   160
  Whether to weeds or flowers; but for me,
  There is no depth to strike in: I can see
  Nought earthly worth my compassing; so stand
  Upon a misty, jutting head of land--
  Alone? No, no; and by the Orphean lute,
  When mad Eurydice is listening to't;
  I'd rather stand upon this misty peak,
  With not a thing to sigh for, or to seek,
  But the soft shadow of my thrice-seen love,
  Than be--I care not what. O meekest dove                      170
  Of heaven! O Cynthia, ten-times bright and fair!
  From thy blue throne, now filling all the air,
  Glance but one little beam of temper'd light
  Into my bosom, that the dreadful might
  And tyranny of love be somewhat scar'd!
  Yet do not so, sweet queen; one torment spar'd,
  Would give a pang to jealous misery,
  Worse than the torment's self: but rather tie
  Large wings upon my shoulders, and point out
  My love's far dwelling. Though the playful rout               180
  Of Cupids shun thee, too divine art thou,
  Too keen in beauty, for thy silver prow
  Not to have dipp'd in love's most gentle stream.
  O be propitious, nor severely deem
  My madness impious; for, by all the stars
  That tend thy bidding, I do think the bars
  That kept my spirit in are burst--that I
  Am sailing with thee through the dizzy sky!
  How beautiful thou art! The world how deep!
  How tremulous-dazzlingly the wheels sweep                     190
  Around their axle! Then these gleaming reins,
  How lithe! When this thy chariot attains
  Its airy goal, haply some bower veils
  Those twilight eyes?--Those eyes!--my spirit fails--
  Dear goddess, help! or the wide-gaping air
  Will gulph me--help!"--At this with madden'd stare,
  And lifted hands, and trembling lips he stood;
  Like old Deucalion mountain'd o'er the flood,
  Or blind Orion hungry for the morn.
  And, but from the deep cavern there was borne                 200
  A voice, he had been froze to senseless stone;
  Nor sigh of his, nor plaint, nor passion'd moan
  Had more been heard. Thus swell'd it forth: "Descend,
  Young mountaineer! descend where alleys bend
  Into the sparry hollows of the world!
  Oft hast thou seen bolts of the thunder hurl'd
  As from thy threshold; day by day hast been
  A little lower than the chilly sheen
  Of icy pinnacles, and dipp'dst thine arms
  Into the deadening ether that still charms                    210
  Their marble being: now, as deep profound
  As those are high, descend! He ne'er is crown'd
  With immortality, who fears to follow
  Where airy voices lead: so through the hollow,
  The silent mysteries of earth, descend!"

    He heard but the last words, nor could contend
  One moment in reflection: for he fled
  Into the fearful deep, to hide his head
  From the clear moon, the trees, and coming madness.

    'Twas far too strange, and wonderful for sadness;
  Sharpening, by degrees, his appetite                          221
  To dive into the deepest. Dark, nor light,
  The region; nor bright, nor sombre wholly,
  But mingled up; a gleaming melancholy;
  A dusky empire and its diadems;
  One faint eternal eventide of gems.
  Aye, millions sparkled on a vein of gold,
  Along whose track the prince quick footsteps told,
  With all its lines abrupt and angular:
  Out-shooting sometimes, like a meteor-star,                   230
  Through a vast antre; then the metal woof,
  Like Vulcan's rainbow, with some monstrous roof
  Curves hugely: now, far in the deep abyss,
  It seems an angry lightning, and doth hiss
  Fancy into belief: anon it leads
  Through winding passages, where sameness breeds
  Vexing conceptions of some sudden change;
  Whether to silver grots, or giant range
  Of sapphire columns, or fantastic bridge
  Athwart a flood of crystal. On a ridge                        240
  Now fareth he, that o'er the vast beneath
  Towers like an ocean-cliff, and whence he seeth
  A hundred waterfalls, whose voices come
  But as the murmuring surge. Chilly and numb
  His bosom grew, when first he, far away,
  Descried an orbed diamond, set to fray
  Old darkness from his throne: 'twas like the sun
  Uprisen o'er chaos: and with such a stun
  Came the amazement, that, absorb'd in it,
  He saw not fiercer wonders--past the wit                      250
  Of any spirit to tell, but one of those
  Who, when this planet's sphering time doth close,
  Will be its high remembrancers: who they?
  The mighty ones who have made eternal day
  For Greece and England. While astonishment
  With deep-drawn sighs was quieting, he went
  Into a marble gallery, passing through
  A mimic temple, so complete and true
  In sacred custom, that he well nigh fear'd
  To search it inwards; whence far off appear'd,                260
  Through a long pillar'd vista, a fair shrine,
  And, just beyond, on light tiptoe divine,
  A quiver'd Dian. Stepping awfully,
  The youth approach'd; oft turning his veil'd eye
  Down sidelong aisles, and into niches old.
  And when, more near against the marble cold
  He had touch'd his forehead, he began to thread
  All courts and passages, where silence dead
  Rous'd by his whispering footsteps murmured faint:
  And long he travers'd to and fro, to acquaint                 270
  Himself with every mystery, and awe;
  Till, weary, he sat down before the maw
  Of a wide outlet, fathomless and dim
  To wild uncertainty and shadows grim.
  There, when new wonders ceas'd to float before,
  And thoughts of self came on, how crude and sore
  The journey homeward to habitual self!
  A mad-pursuing of the fog-born elf,
  Whose flitting lantern, through rude nettle-briar,
  Cheats us into a swamp, into a fire,                          280
  Into the bosom of a hated thing.

    What misery most drowningly doth sing
  In lone Endymion's ear, now he has caught
  The goal of consciousness? Ah, 'tis the thought,
  The deadly feel of solitude: for lo!
  He cannot see the heavens, nor the flow
  Of rivers, nor hill-flowers running wild
  In pink and purple chequer, nor, up-pil'd,
  The cloudy rack slow journeying in the west,
  Like herded elephants; nor felt, nor prest                    290
  Cool grass, nor tasted the fresh slumberous air;
  But far from such companionship to wear
  An unknown time, surcharg'd with grief, away,
  Was now his lot. And must he patient stay,
  Tracing fantastic figures with his spear?
  "No!" exclaimed he, "why should I tarry here?"
  No! loudly echoed times innumerable.
  At which he straightway started, and 'gan tell
  His paces back into the temple's chief;
  Warming and growing strong in the belief                      300
  Of help from Dian: so that when again
  He caught her airy form, thus did he plain,
  Moving more near the while. "O Haunter chaste
  Of river sides, and woods, and heathy waste,
  Where with thy silver bow and arrows keen
  Art thou now forested? O woodland Queen,
  What smoothest air thy smoother forehead woos?
  Where dost thou listen to the wide halloos
  Of thy disparted nymphs? Through what dark tree
  Glimmers thy crescent? Wheresoe'er it be,                     310
  'Tis in the breath of heaven: thou dost taste
  Freedom as none can taste it, nor dost waste
  Thy loveliness in dismal elements;
  But, finding in our green earth sweet contents,
  There livest blissfully. Ah, if to thee
  It feels Elysian, how rich to me,
  An exil'd mortal, sounds its pleasant name!
  Within my breast there lives a choking flame--
  O let me cool it among the zephyr-boughs!
  A homeward fever parches up my tongue--                       320
  O let me slake it at the running springs!
  Upon my car a noisy nothing rings--
  O let me once more hear the linnet's note!
  Before mine eyes thick films and shadows float--
  O let me 'noint them with the heaven's light!
  Dost thou now lave thy feet and ankles white?
  O think how sweet to me the freshening sluice!
  Dost thou now please thy thirst with berry-juice?
  O think how this dry palate would rejoice!
  If in soft slumber thou dost hear my voice,                   330
  O think how I should love a bed of flowers!--
  Young goddess! let me see my native bowers!
  Deliver me from this rapacious deep!"

    Thus ending loudly, as he would o'erleap
  His destiny, alert he stood: but when
  Obstinate silence came heavily again,
  Feeling about for its old couch of space
  And airy cradle, lowly bow'd his face
  Desponding, o'er the marble floor's cold thrill.
  But 'twas not long; for, sweeter than the rill                340
  To its old channel, or a swollen tide
  To margin sallows, were the leaves he spied,
  And flowers, and wreaths, and ready myrtle crowns
  Up heaping through the slab: refreshment drowns
  Itself, and strives its own delights to hide--
  Nor in one spot alone; the floral pride
  In a long whispering birth enchanted grew
  Before his footsteps; as when heav'd anew
  Old ocean rolls a lengthened wave to the shore,
  Down whose green back the short-liv'd foam, all hoar,
  Bursts gradual, with a wayward indolence.                     351

    Increasing still in heart, and pleasant sense,
  Upon his fairy journey on he hastes;
  So anxious for the end, he scarcely wastes
  One moment with his hand among the sweets:
  Onward he goes--he stops--his bosom beats
  As plainly in his ear, as the faint charm
  Of which the throbs were born. This still alarm,
  This sleepy music, forc'd him walk tiptoe:
  For it came more softly than the east could blow              360
  Arion's magic to the Atlantic isles;
  Or than the west, made jealous by the smiles
  Of thron'd Apollo, could breathe back the lyre
  To seas Ionian and Tyrian.

    O did he ever live, that lonely man,
  Who lov'd--and music slew not? 'Tis the pest
  Of love, that fairest joys give most unrest;
  That things of delicate and tenderest worth
  Are swallow'd all, and made a seared dearth,
  By one consuming flame: it doth immerse                       370
  And suffocate true blessings in a curse.
  Half-happy, by comparison of bliss,
  Is miserable. 'Twas even so with this
  Dew-dropping melody, in the Carian's ear;
  First heaven, then hell, and then forgotten clear,
  Vanish'd in elemental passion.

    And down some swart abysm he had gone,
  Had not a heavenly guide benignant led
  To where thick myrtle branches, 'gainst his head
  Brushing, awakened: then the sounds again                     380
  Went noiseless as a passing noontide rain
  Over a bower, where little space he stood;
  For as the sunset peeps into a wood
  So saw he panting light, and towards it went
  Through winding alleys; and lo, wonderment!
  Upon soft verdure saw, one here, one there,
  Cupids a slumbering on their pinions fair.

    After a thousand mazes overgone,
  At last, with sudden step, he came upon
  A chamber, myrtle wall'd, embowered high,                     390
  Full of light, incense, tender minstrelsy,
  And more of beautiful and strange beside:
  For on a silken couch of rosy pride,
  In midst of all, there lay a sleeping youth
  Of fondest beauty; fonder, in fair sooth,
  Than sighs could fathom, or contentment reach:
  And coverlids gold-tinted like the peach,
  Or ripe October's faded marigolds,
  Fell sleek about him in a thousand folds--
  Not hiding up an Apollonian curve                             400
  Of neck and shoulder, nor the tenting swerve
  Of knee from knee, nor ankles pointing light;
  But rather, giving them to the filled sight
  Officiously. Sideway his face repos'd
  On one white arm, and tenderly unclos'd,
  By tenderest pressure, a faint damask mouth
  To slumbery pout; just as the morning south
  Disparts a dew-lipp'd rose. Above his head,
  Four lily stalks did their white honours wed
  To make a coronal; and round him grew                         410
  All tendrils green, of every bloom and hue,
  Together intertwin'd and trammel'd fresh:
  The vine of glossy sprout; the ivy mesh,
  Shading its Ethiop berries; and woodbine,
  Of velvet leaves and bugle-blooms divine;
  Convolvulus in streaked vases flush;
  The creeper, mellowing for an autumn blush;
  And virgin's bower, trailing airily;
  With others of the sisterhood. Hard by,
  Stood serene Cupids watching silently.                        420
  One, kneeling to a lyre, touch'd the strings,
  Muffling to death the pathos with his wings;
  And, ever and anon, uprose to look
  At the youth's slumber; while another took
  A willow-bough, distilling odorous dew,
  And shook it on his hair; another flew
  In through the woven roof, and fluttering-wise
  Rain'd violets upon his sleeping eyes.

    At these enchantments, and yet many more,
  The breathless Latmian wonder'd o'er and o'er;                430
  Until, impatient in embarrassment,
  He forthright pass'd, and lightly treading went
  To that same feather'd lyrist, who straightway,
  Smiling, thus whisper'd: "Though from upper day
  Thou art a wanderer, and thy presence here
  Might seem unholy, be of happy cheer!
  For 'tis the nicest touch of human honour,
  When some ethereal and high-favouring donor
  Presents immortal bowers to mortal sense;
  As now 'tis done to thee, Endymion. Hence                     440
  Was I in no wise startled. So recline
  Upon these living flowers. Here is wine,
  Alive with sparkles--never, I aver,
  Since Ariadne was a vintager,
  So cool a purple: taste these juicy pears,
  Sent me by sad Vertumnus, when his fears
  Were high about Pomona: here is cream,
  Deepening to richness from a snowy gleam;
  Sweeter than that nurse Amalthea skimm'd
  For the boy Jupiter: and here, undimm'd                       450
  By any touch, a bunch of blooming plums
  Ready to melt between an infant's gums:
  And here is manna pick'd from Syrian trees,
  In starlight, by the three Hesperides.
  Feast on, and meanwhile I will let thee know
  Of all these things around us." He did so,
  Still brooding o'er the cadence of his lyre;
  And thus: "I need not any hearing tire
  By telling how the sea-born goddess pin'd
  For a mortal youth, and how she strove to bind                460
  Him all in all unto her doting self.
  Who would not be so prison'd? but, fond elf,
  He was content to let her amorous plea
  Faint through his careless arms; content to see
  An unseiz'd heaven dying at his feet;
  Content, O fool! to make a cold retreat,
  When on the pleasant grass such love, lovelorn,
  Lay sorrowing; when every tear was born
  Of diverse passion; when her lips and eyes
  Were clos'd in sullen moisture, and quick sighs               470
  Came vex'd and pettish through her nostrils small.
  Hush! no exclaim--yet, justly mightst thou call
  Curses upon his head.--I was half glad,
  But my poor mistress went distract and mad,
  When the boar tusk'd him: so away she flew
  To Jove's high throne, and by her plainings drew
  Immortal tear-drops down the thunderer's beard;
  Whereon, it was decreed he should be rear'd
  Each summer time to life. Lo! this is he,
  That same Adonis, safe in the privacy                         480
  Of this still region all his winter-sleep.
  Aye, sleep; for when our love-sick queen did weep
  Over his waned corse, the tremulous shower
  Heal'd up the wound, and, with a balmy power,
  Medicined death to a lengthened drowsiness:
  The which she fills with visions, and doth dress
  In all this quiet luxury; and hath set
  Us young immortals, without any let,
  To watch his slumber through. 'Tis well nigh pass'd,
  Even to a moment's filling up, and fast                       490
  She scuds with summer breezes, to pant through
  The first long kiss, warm firstling, to renew
  Embower'd sports in Cytherea's isle.
  Look! how those winged listeners all this while
  Stand anxious: see! behold!"--This clamant word
  Broke through the careful silence; for they heard
  A rustling noise of leaves, and out there flutter'd
  Pigeons and doves: Adonis something mutter'd,
  The while one hand, that erst upon his thigh
  Lay dormant, mov'd convuls'd and gradually                    500
  Up to his forehead. Then there was a hum
  Of sudden voices, echoing, "Come! come!
  Arise! awake! Clear summer has forth walk'd
  Unto the clover-sward, and she has talk'd
  Full soothingly to every nested finch:
  Rise, Cupids! or we'll give the blue-bell pinch
  To your dimpled arms. Once more sweet life begin!"
  At this, from every side they hurried in,
  Rubbing their sleepy eyes with lazy wrists,
  And doubling over head their little fists                     510
  In backward yawns. But all were soon alive:
  For as delicious wine doth, sparkling, dive
  In nectar'd clouds and curls through water fair,
  So from the arbour roof down swell'd an air
  Odorous and enlivening; making all
  To laugh, and play, and sing, and loudly call
  For their sweet queen: when lo! the wreathed green
  Disparted, and far upward could be seen
  Blue heaven, and a silver car, air-borne,
  Whose silent wheels, fresh wet from clouds of morn,
  Spun off a drizzling dew,--which falling chill                521
  On soft Adonis' shoulders, made him still
  Nestle and turn uneasily about.
  Soon were the white doves plain, with necks stretch'd out,
  And silken traces lighten'd in descent;
  And soon, returning from love's banishment,
  Queen Venus leaning downward open arm'd:
  Her shadow fell upon his breast, and charm'd
  A tumult to his heart, and a new life
  Into his eyes. Ah, miserable strife,                          530
  But for her comforting! unhappy sight,
  But meeting her blue orbs! Who, who can write
  Of these first minutes? The unchariest muse
  To embracements warm as theirs makes coy excuse.

    O it has ruffled every spirit there,
  Saving love's self, who stands superb to share
  The general gladness: awfully he stands;
  A sovereign quell is in his waving hands;
  No sight can bear the lightning of his bow;
  His quiver is mysterious, none can know                       540
  What themselves think of it; from forth his eyes
  There darts strange light of varied hues and dyes:
  A scowl is sometimes on his brow, but who
  Look full upon it feel anon the blue
  Of his fair eyes run liquid through their souls.
  Endymion feels it, and no more controls
  The burning prayer within him; so, bent low,
  He had begun a plaining of his woe.
  But Venus, bending forward, said: "My child,
  Favour this gentle youth; his days are wild                   550
  With love--he--but alas! too well I see
  Thou know'st the deepness of his misery.
  Ah, smile not so, my son: I tell thee true,
  That when through heavy hours I used to rue
  The endless sleep of this new-born Adon',
  This stranger ay I pitied. For upon
  A dreary morning once I fled away
  Into the breezy clouds, to weep and pray
  For this my love: for vexing Mars had teaz'd
  Me even to tears: thence, when a little eas'd,                560
  Down-looking, vacant, through a hazy wood,
  I saw this youth as he despairing stood:
  Those same dark curls blown vagrant in the wind;
  Those same full fringed lids a constant blind
  Over his sullen eyes: I saw him throw
  Himself on wither'd leaves, even as though
  Death had come sudden; for no jot he mov'd,
  Yet mutter'd wildly. I could hear he lov'd
  Some fair immortal, and that his embrace
  Had zoned her through the night. There is no trace            570
  Of this in heaven: I have mark'd each cheek,
  And find it is the vainest thing to seek;
  And that of all things 'tis kept secretest.
  Endymion! one day thou wilt be blest:
  So still obey the guiding hand that fends
  Thee safely through these wonders for sweet ends.
  'Tis a concealment needful in extreme;
  And if I guess'd not so, the sunny beam
  Thou shouldst mount up to with me. Now adieu!
  Here must we leave thee."--At these words up flew             580
  The impatient doves, up rose the floating car,
  Up went the hum celestial. High afar
  The Latmian saw them minish into nought;
  And, when all were clear vanish'd, still he caught
  A vivid lightning from that dreadful bow.
  When all was darkened, with Etnean throe
  The earth clos'd--gave a solitary moan--
  And left him once again in twilight lone.

    He did not rave, he did not stare aghast,
  For all those visions were o'ergone, and past,                590
  And he in loneliness: he felt assur'd
  Of happy times, when all he had endur'd
  Would seem a feather to the mighty prize.
  So, with unusual gladness, on he hies
  Through caves, and palaces of mottled ore,
  Gold dome, and crystal wall, and turquois floor,
  Black polish'd porticos of awful shade,
  And, at the last, a diamond balustrade,
  Leading afar past wild magnificence,
  Spiral through ruggedest loopholes, and thence                600
  Stretching across a void, then guiding o'er
  Enormous chasms, where, all foam and roar,
  Streams subterranean tease their granite beds;
  Then heighten'd just above the silvery heads
  Of a thousand fountains, so that he could dash
  The waters with his spear; but at the splash,
  Done heedlessly, those spouting columns rose
  Sudden a poplar's height, and 'gan to enclose
  His diamond path with fretwork, streaming round
  Alive, and dazzling cool, and with a sound,                   610
  Haply, like dolphin tumults, when sweet shells
  Welcome the float of Thetis. Long he dwells
  On this delight; for, every minute's space,
  The streams with changed magic interlace:
  Sometimes like delicatest lattices,
  Cover'd with crystal vines; then weeping trees,
  Moving about as in a gentle wind,
  Which, in a wink, to watery gauze refin'd,
  Pour'd into shapes of curtain'd canopies,
  Spangled, and rich with liquid broideries                     620
  Of flowers, peacocks, swans, and naiads fair.
  Swifter than lightning went these wonders rare;
  And then the water, into stubborn streams
  Collecting, mimick'd the wrought oaken beams,
  Pillars, and frieze, and high fantastic roof,
  Of those dusk places in times far aloof
  Cathedrals call'd. He bade a loth farewel
  To these founts Protean, passing gulph, and dell,
  And torrent, and ten thousand jutting shapes,
  Half seen through deepest gloom, and griesly gapes,           630
  Blackening on every side, and overhead
  A vaulted dome like Heaven's, far bespread
  With starlight gems: aye, all so huge and strange,
  The solitary felt a hurried change
  Working within him into something dreary,--
  Vex'd like a morning eagle, lost, and weary,
  And purblind amid foggy, midnight wolds.
  But he revives at once: for who beholds
  New sudden things, nor casts his mental slough?
  Forth from a rugged arch, in the dusk below,                  640
  Came mother Cybele! alone--alone--
  In sombre chariot; dark foldings thrown
  About her majesty, and front death-pale,
  With turrets crown'd. Four maned lions hale
  The sluggish wheels; solemn their toothed maws,
  Their surly eyes brow-hidden, heavy paws
  Uplifted drowsily, and nervy tails
  Cowering their tawny brushes. Silent sails
  This shadowy queen athwart, and faints away
  In another gloomy arch.                                       650

                           Wherefore delay,
  Young traveller, in such a mournful place?
  Art thou wayworn, or canst not further trace
  The diamond path? And does it indeed end
  Abrupt in middle air? Yet earthward bend
  Thy forehead, and to Jupiter cloud-borne
  Call ardently! He was indeed wayworn;
  Abrupt, in middle air, his way was lost;
  To cloud-borne Jove he bowed, and there crost
  Towards him a large eagle, 'twixt whose wings,                660
  Without one impious word, himself he flings,
  Committed to the darkness and the gloom:
  Down, down, uncertain to what pleasant doom,
  Swift as a fathoming plummet down he fell
  Through unknown things; till exhaled asphodel,
  And rose, with spicy fannings interbreath'd,
  Came swelling forth where little caves were wreath'd
  So thick with leaves and mosses, that they seem'd
  Large honey-combs of green, and freshly teem'd
  With airs delicious. In the greenest nook                     670
  The eagle landed him, and farewel took.

    It was a jasmine bower, all bestrown
  With golden moss. His every sense had grown
  Ethereal for pleasure; 'bove his head
  Flew a delight half-graspable; his tread
  Was Hesperean; to his capable ears
  Silence was music from the holy spheres;
  A dewy luxury was in his eyes;
  The little flowers felt his pleasant sighs
  And stirr'd them faintly. Verdant cave and cell               680
  He wander'd through, oft wondering at such swell
  Of sudden exaltation: but, "Alas!
  Said he, "will all this gush of feeling pass
  Away in solitude? And must they wane,
  Like melodies upon a sandy plain,
  Without an echo? Then shall I be left
  So sad, so melancholy, so bereft!
  Yet still I feel immortal! O my love,
  My breath of life, where art thou? High above,
  Dancing before the morning gates of heaven?                   690
  Or keeping watch among those starry seven,
  Old Atlas' children? Art a maid of the waters,
  One of shell-winding Triton's bright-hair'd daughters?
  Or art, impossible! a nymph of Dian's,
  Weaving a coronal of tender scions
  For very idleness? Where'er thou art,
  Methinks it now is at my will to start
  Into thine arms; to scare Aurora's train,
  And snatch thee from the morning; o'er the main
  To scud like a wild bird, and take thee off                   700
  From thy sea-foamy cradle; or to doff
  Thy shepherd vest, and woo thee mid fresh leaves.
  No, no, too eagerly my soul deceives
  Its powerless self: I know this cannot be.
  O let me then by some sweet dreaming flee
  To her entrancements: hither sleep awhile!
  Hither most gentle sleep! and soothing foil
  For some few hours the coming solitude."

    Thus spake he, and that moment felt endued
  With power to dream deliciously; so wound                     710
  Through a dim passage, searching till he found
  The smoothest mossy bed and deepest, where
  He threw himself, and just into the air
  Stretching his indolent arms, he took, O bliss!
  A naked waist: "Fair Cupid, whence is this?"
  A well-known voice sigh'd, "Sweetest, here am I!"
  At which soft ravishment, with doating cry
  They trembled to each other.--Helicon!
  O fountain'd hill! Old Homer's Helicon!
  That thou wouldst spout a little streamlet o'er               720
  These sorry pages; then the verse would soar
  And sing above this gentle pair, like lark
  Over his nested young: but all is dark
  Around thine aged top, and thy clear fount
  Exhales in mists to heaven. Aye, the count
  Of mighty Poets is made up; the scroll
  Is folded by the Muses; the bright roll
  Is in Apollo's hand: our dazed eyes
  Have seen a new tinge in the western skies:
  The world has done its duty. Yet, oh yet,                     730
  Although the sun of poesy is set,
  These lovers did embrace, and we must weep
  That there is no old power left to steep
  A quill immortal in their joyous tears.
  Long time in silence did their anxious fears
  Question that thus it was; long time they lay
  Fondling and kissing every doubt away;
  Long time ere soft caressing sobs began
  To mellow into words, and then there ran
  Two bubbling springs of talk from their sweet lips.           740
  "O known Unknown! from whom my being sips
  Such darling essence, wherefore may I not
  Be ever in these arms? in this sweet spot
  Pillow my chin for ever? ever press
  These toying hands and kiss their smooth excess?
  Why not for ever and for ever feel
  That breath about my eyes? Ah, thou wilt steal
  Away from me again, indeed, indeed--
  Thou wilt be gone away, and wilt not heed
  My lonely madness. Speak, my kindest fair!                    750
  Is--is it to be so? No! Who will dare
  To pluck thee from me? And, of thine own will,
  Full well I feel thou wouldst not leave me. Still
  Let me entwine thee surer, surer--now
  How can we part? Elysium! who art thou?
  Who, that thou canst not be for ever here,
  Or lift me with thee to some starry sphere?
  Enchantress! tell me by this soft embrace,
  By the most soft completion of thy face,
  Those lips, O slippery blisses, twinkling eyes,               760
  And by these tenderest, milky sovereignties--
  These tenderest, and by the nectar-wine,
  The passion"----"O lov'd Ida the divine!
  Endymion! dearest! Ah, unhappy me!
  His soul will 'scape us--O felicity!
  How he does love me! His poor temples beat
  To the very tune of love--how sweet, sweet, sweet.
  Revive, dear youth, or I shall faint and die;
  Revive, or these soft hours will hurry by
  In tranced dulness; speak, and let that spell                 770
  Affright this lethargy! I cannot quell
  Its heavy pressure, and will press at least
  My lips to thine, that they may richly feast
  Until we taste the life of love again.
  What! dost thou move? dost kiss? O bliss! O pain!
  I love thee, youth, more than I can conceive;
  And so long absence from thee doth bereave
  My soul of any rest: yet must I hence:
  Yet, can I not to starry eminence
  Uplift thee; nor for very shame can own                       780
  Myself to thee. Ah, dearest, do not groan
  Or thou wilt force me from this secrecy,
  And I must blush in heaven. O that I
  Had done it already; that the dreadful smiles
  At my lost brightness, my impassion'd wiles,
  Had waned from Olympus' solemn height,
  And from all serious Gods; that our delight
  Was quite forgotten, save of us alone!
  And wherefore so ashamed? 'Tis but to atone
  For endless pleasure, by some coward blushes:                 790
  Yet must I be a coward!--Honour rushes
  Too palpable before me--the sad look
  Of Jove--Minerva's start--no bosom shook
  With awe of purity--no Cupid pinion
  In reverence veiled--my crystalline dominion
  Half lost, and all old hymns made nullity!
  But what is this to love? O I could fly
  With thee into the ken of heavenly powers,
  So thou wouldst thus, for many sequent hours,
  Press me so sweetly. Now I swear at once                      800
  That I am wise, that Pallas is a dunce--
  Perhaps her love like mine is but unknown--
  O I do think that I have been alone
  In chastity: yes, Pallas has been sighing,
  While every eye saw me my hair uptying
  With fingers cool as aspen leaves. Sweet love,
  I was as vague as solitary dove,
  Nor knew that nests were built. Now a soft kiss--
  Aye, by that kiss, I vow an endless bliss,
  An immortality of passion's thine:                            810
  Ere long I will exalt thee to the shine
  Of heaven ambrosial; and we will shade
  Ourselves whole summers by a river glade;
  And I will tell thee stories of the sky,
  And breathe thee whispers of its minstrelsy.
  My happy love will overwing all bounds!
  O let me melt into thee; let the sounds
  Of our close voices marry at their birth;
  Let us entwine hoveringly--O dearth
  Of human words! roughness of mortal speech!                   820
  Lispings empyrean will I sometime teach
  Thine honied tongue--lute-breathings, which I gasp
  To have thee understand, now while I clasp
  Thee thus, and weep for fondness--I am pain'd,
  Endymion: woe! woe! is grief contain'd
  In the very deeps of pleasure, my sole life?"--
  Hereat, with many sobs, her gentle strife
  Melted into a languor. He return'd
  Entranced vows and tears.

                            Ye who have yearn'd                 830
  With too much passion, will here stay and pity,
  For the mere sake of truth; as 'tis a ditty
  Not of these days, but long ago 'twas told
  By a cavern wind unto a forest old;
  And then the forest told it in a dream
  To a sleeping lake, whose cool and level gleam
  A poet caught as he was journeying
  To Phœbus' shrine; and in it he did fling
  His weary limbs, bathing an hour's space,
  And after, straight in that inspired place                    840
  He sang the story up into the air,
  Giving it universal freedom. There
  Has it been ever sounding for those ears
  Whose tips are glowing hot. The legend cheers
  Yon centinel stars; and he who listens to it
  Must surely be self-doomed or he will rue it:
  For quenchless burnings come upon the heart,
  Made fiercer by a fear lest any part
  Should be engulphed in the eddying wind.
  As much as here is penn'd doth always find                    850
  A resting place, thus much comes clear and plain;
  Anon the strange voice is upon the wane--
  And 'tis but echo'd from departing sound,
  That the fair visitant at last unwound
  Her gentle limbs, and left the youth asleep.--
  Thus the tradition of the gusty deep.

    Now turn we to our former chroniclers.--
  Endymion awoke, that grief of hers
  Sweet paining on his ear: he sickly guess'd
  How lone he was once more, and sadly press'd                  860
  His empty arms together, hung his head,
  And most forlorn upon that widow'd bed
  Sat silently. Love's madness he had known:
  Often with more than tortured lion's groan
  Moanings had burst from him; but now that rage
  Had pass'd away: no longer did he wage
  A rough-voic'd war against the dooming stars.
  No, he had felt too much for such harsh jars:
  The lyre of his soul Eolian tun'd
  Forgot all violence, and but commun'd                         870
  With melancholy thought: O he had swoon'd
  Drunken from pleasure's nipple; and his love
  Henceforth was dove-like.--Loth was he to move
  From the imprinted couch, and when he did,
  'Twas with slow, languid paces, and face hid
  In muffling hands. So temper'd, out he stray'd
  Half seeing visions that might have dismay'd
  Alecto's serpents; ravishments more keen
  Than Hermes' pipe, when anxious he did lean
  Over eclipsing eyes: and at the last                          880
  It was a sounding grotto, vaulted, vast,
  O'er studded with a thousand, thousand pearls,
  And crimson mouthed shells with stubborn curls,
  Of every shape and size, even to the bulk
  In which whales arbour close, to brood and sulk
  Against an endless storm. Moreover too,
  Fish-semblances, of green and azure hue,
  Ready to snort their streams. In this cool wonder
  Endymion sat down, and 'gan to ponder
  On all his life: his youth, up to the day                     890
  When 'mid acclaim, and feasts, and garlands gay,
  He stept upon his shepherd throne: the look
  Of his white palace in wild forest nook,
  And all the revels he had lorded there:
  Each tender maiden whom he once thought fair,
  With every friend and fellow-woodlander--
  Pass'd like a dream before him. Then the spur
  Of the old bards to mighty deeds: his plans
  To nurse the golden age 'mong shepherd clans:
  That wondrous night: the great Pan-festival:                  900
  His sister's sorrow; and his wanderings all,
  Until into the earth's deep maw he rush'd:
  Then all its buried magic, till it flush'd
  High with excessive love. "And now," thought he,
  "How long must I remain in jeopardy
  Of blank amazements that amaze no more?
  Now I have tasted her sweet soul to the core
  All other depths are shallow: essences,
  Once spiritual, are like muddy lees,
  Meant but to fertilize my earthly root,                       910
  And make my branches lift a golden fruit
  Into the bloom of heaven: other light,
  Though it be quick and sharp enough to blight
  The Olympian eagle's vision, is dark,
  Dark as the parentage of chaos. Hark!
  My silent thoughts are echoing from these shells;
  Or they are but the ghosts, the dying swells
  Of noises far away?--list!"--Hereupon
  He kept an anxious ear. The humming tone
  Came louder, and behold, there as he lay,                     920
  On either side outgush'd, with misty spray,
  A copious spring; and both together dash'd
  Swift, mad, fantastic round the rocks, and lash'd
  Among the conchs and shells of the lofty grot,
  Leaving a trickling dew. At last they shot
  Down from the ceiling's height, pouring a noise
  As of some breathless racers whose hopes poize
  Upon the last few steps, and with spent force
  Along the ground they took a winding course.
  Endymion follow'd--for it seem'd that one                     930
  Ever pursued, the other strove to shun--
  Follow'd their languid mazes, till well nigh
  He had left thinking of the mystery,--
  And was now rapt in tender hoverings
  Over the vanish'd bliss. Ah! what is it sings
  His dream away? What melodies are these?
  They sound as through the whispering of trees,
  Not native in such barren vaults. Give ear!

    "O Arethusa, peerless nymph! why fear
  Such tenderness as mine? Great Dian, why,                     940
  Why didst thou hear her prayer? O that I
  Were rippling round her dainty fairness now,
  Circling about her waist, and striving how
  To entice her to a dive! then stealing in
  Between her luscious lips and eyelids thin.
  O that her shining hair was in the sun,
  And I distilling from it thence to run
  In amorous rillets down her shrinking form!
  To linger on her lily shoulders, warm
  Between her kissing breasts, and every charm                  950
  Touch raptur'd!--See how painfully I flow:
  Fair maid, be pitiful to my great woe.
  Stay, stay thy weary course, and let me lead,
  A happy wooer, to the flowery mead
  Where all that beauty snar'd me."--"Cruel god,
  Desist! or my offended mistress' nod
  Will stagnate all thy fountains:--tease me not
  With syren words--Ah, have I really got
  Such power to madden thee? And is it true--
  Away, away, or I shall dearly rue                             960
  My very thoughts: in mercy then away,
  Kindest Alpheus, for should I obey
  My own dear will, 'twould be a deadly bane."--
  "O, Oread-Queen! would that thou hadst a pain
  Like this of mine, then would I fearless turn
  And be a criminal."--"Alas, I burn,
  I shudder--gentle river, get thee hence.
  Alpheus! thou enchanter! every sense
  Of mine was once made perfect in these woods.
  Fresh breezes, bowery lawns, and innocent floods,             970
  Ripe fruits, and lonely couch, contentment gave;
  But ever since I heedlessly did lave
  In thy deceitful stream, a panting glow
  Grew strong within me: wherefore serve me so,
  And call it love? Alas, 'twas cruelty.
  Not once more did I close my happy eyes
  Amid the thrush's song. Away! Avaunt!
  O 'twas a cruel thing."--"Now thou dost taunt
  So softly, Arethusa, that I think
  If thou wast playing on my shady brink,                       980
  Thou wouldst bathe once again. Innocent maid!
  Stifle thine heart no more:--nor be afraid
  Of angry powers: there are deities
  Will shade us with their wings. Those fitful sighs
  'Tis almost death to hear: O let me pour
  A dewy balm upon them!--fear no more,
  Sweet Arethusa! Dian's self must feel
  Sometimes these very pangs. Dear maiden, steal
  Blushing into my soul, and let us fly
  These dreary caverns for the open sky.                        990
  I will delight thee all my winding course,
  From the green sea up to my hidden source
  About Arcadian forests; and will shew
  The channels where my coolest waters flow
  Through mossy rocks; where, 'mid exuberant green,
  I roam in pleasant darkness, more unseen
  Than Saturn in his exile; where I brim
  Round flowery islands, and take thence a skim
  Of mealy sweets, which myriads of bees
  Buzz from their honied wings: and thou shouldst please
  Thyself to choose the richest, where we might                1001
  Be incense-pillow'd every summer night.
  Doff all sad fears, thou white deliciousness,
  And let us be thus comforted; unless
  Thou couldst rejoice to see my hopeless stream
  Hurry distracted from Sol's temperate beam,
  And pour to death along some hungry sands."--
  "What can I do, Alpheus? Dian stands
  Severe before me: persecuting fate!
  Unhappy Arethusa! thou wast late                             1010
  A huntress free in"--At this, sudden fell
  Those two sad streams adown a fearful dell.
  The Latmian listen'd, but he heard no more,
  Save echo, faint repeating o'er and o'er
  The name of Arethusa. On the verge
  Of that dark gulph he wept, and said: "I urge
  Thee, gentle Goddess of my pilgrimage,
  By our eternal hopes, to soothe, to assuage,
  If thou art powerful, these lovers pains;
  And make them happy in some happy plains.                    1020

    He turn'd--there was a whelming sound--he stept,
  There was a cooler light; and so he kept
  Towards it by a sandy path, and lo!
  More suddenly than doth a moment go,
  The visions of the earth were gone and fled--
  He saw the giant sea above his head.


