

ENDYMION.

BOOK III.


  There are who lord it o'er their fellow-men
  With most prevailing tinsel: who unpen
  Their baaing vanities, to browse away
  The comfortable green and juicy hay
  From human pastures; or, O torturing fact!
  Who, through an idiot blink, will see unpack'd
  Fire-branded foxes to sear up and singe
  Our gold and ripe-ear'd hopes. With not one tinge
  Of sanctuary splendour, not a sight
  Able to face an owl's, they still are dight                    10
  By the blear-eyed nations in empurpled vests,
  And crowns, and turbans. With unladen breasts,
  Save of blown self-applause, they proudly mount
  To their spirit's perch, their being's high account,
  Their tiptop nothings, their dull skies, their thrones--
  Amid the fierce intoxicating tones
  Of trumpets, shoutings, and belabour'd drums,
  And sudden cannon. All! how all this hums,
  In wakeful ears, like uproar past and gone--
  Like thunder clouds that spake to Babylon,                     20
  And set those old Chaldeans to their tasks.--
  Are then regalities all gilded masks?
  No, there are throned seats unscalable
  But by a patient wing, a constant spell,
  Or by ethereal things that, unconfin'd,
  Can make a ladder of the eternal wind,
  And poise about in cloudy thunder-tents
  To watch the abysm-birth of elements.
  Aye, 'bove the withering of old-lipp'd Fate
  A thousand Powers keep religious state,                        30
  In water, fiery realm, and airy bourne;
  And, silent as a consecrated urn,
  Hold sphery sessions for a season due.
  Yet few of these far majesties, ah, few!
  Have bared their operations to this globe--
  Few, who with gorgeous pageantry enrobe
  Our piece of heaven--whose benevolence
  Shakes hand with our own Ceres; every sense
  Filling with spiritual sweets to plenitude,
  As bees gorge full their cells. And, by the feud               40
  'Twixt Nothing and Creation, I here swear,
  Eterne Apollo! that thy Sister fair
  Is of all these the gentlier-mightiest.
  When thy gold breath is misting in the west,
  She unobserved steals unto her throne,
  And there she sits most meek and most alone;
  As if she had not pomp subservient;
  As if thine eye, high Poet! was not bent
  Towards her with the Muses in thine heart;
  As if the ministring stars kept not apart,                     50
  Waiting for silver-footed messages.
  O Moon! the oldest shades 'mong oldest trees
  Feel palpitations when thou lookest in:
  O Moon! old boughs lisp forth a holier din
  The while they feel thine airy fellowship.
  Thou dost bless every where, with silver lip
  Kissing dead things to life. The sleeping kine,
  Couched in thy brightness, dream of fields divine:
  Innumerable mountains rise, and rise,
  Ambitious for the hallowing of thine eyes;                     60
  And yet thy benediction passeth not
  One obscure hiding-place, one little spot
  Where pleasure may be sent: the nested wren
  Has thy fair face within its tranquil ken,
  And from beneath a sheltering ivy leaf
  Takes glimpses of thee; thou art a relief
  To the poor patient oyster, where it sleeps
  Within its pearly house.--The mighty deeps,
  The monstrous sea is thine--the myriad sea!
  O Moon! far-spooming Ocean bows to thee,                       70
  And Tellus feels his forehead's cumbrous load.

    Cynthia! where art thou now? What far abode
  Of green or silvery bower doth enshrine
  Such utmost beauty? Alas, thou dost pine
  For one as sorrowful: thy cheek is pale
  For one whose cheek is pale: thou dost bewail
  His tears, who weeps for thee. Where dost thou sigh?
  Ah! surely that light peeps from Vesper's eye,
  Or what a thing is love! 'Tis She, but lo!
  How chang'd, how full of ache, how gone in woe!                80
  She dies at the thinnest cloud; her loveliness
  Is wan on Neptune's blue: yet there's a stress
  Of love-spangles, just off yon cape of trees,
  Dancing upon the waves, as if to please
  The curly foam with amorous influence.
  O, not so idle: for down-glancing thence
  She fathoms eddies, and runs wild about
  O'erwhelming water-courses; scaring out
  The thorny sharks from hiding-holes, and fright'ning
  Their savage eyes with unaccustomed lightning.                 90
  Where will the splendor be content to reach?
  O love! how potent hast thou been to teach
  Strange journeyings! Wherever beauty dwells,
  In gulf or aerie, mountains or deep dells,
  In light, in gloom, in star or blazing sun,
  Thou pointest out the way, and straight 'tis won.
  Amid his toil thou gav'st Leander breath;
  Thou leddest Orpheus through the gleams of death;
  Thou madest Pluto bear thin element;
  And now, O winged Chieftain! them hast sent                   100
  A moon-beam to the deep, deep water-world,
  To find Endymion.

                    On gold sand impearl'd
  With lily shells, and pebbles milky white,
  Poor Cynthia greeted him, and sooth'd her light
  Against his pallid face: he felt the charm
  To breathlessness, and suddenly a warm
  Of his heart's blood: 'twas very sweet; he stay'd
  His wandering steps, and half-entranced laid
  His head upon a tuft of straggling weeds,                     110
  To taste the gentle moon, and freshening beads,
  Lashed from the crystal roof by fishes' tails.
  And so he kept, until the rosy veils
  Mantling the east, by Aurora's peering hand
  Were lifted from the water's breast, and faun'd
  Into sweet air; and sober'd morning came
  Meekly through billows:--when like taper-flame
  Left sudden by a dallying breath of air,
  He rose in silence, and once more 'gan fare
  Along his fated way.                                          120

                        Far had he roam'd,
  With nothing save the hollow vast, that foam'd
  Above, around, and at his feet; save things
  More dead than Morpheus' imaginings:
  Old rusted anchors, helmets, breast-plates large
  Of gone sea-warriors; brazen beaks and targe;
  Rudders that for a hundred years had lost
  The sway of human hand; gold vase emboss'd
  With long-forgotten story, and wherein
  No reveller had ever dipp'd a chin                            130
  But those of Saturn's vintage; mouldering scrolls,
  Writ in the tongue of heaven, by those souls
  Who first were on the earth; and sculptures rude
  In ponderous stone, developing the mood
  Of ancient Nox;--then skeletons of man,
  Of beast, behemoth, and leviathan,
  And elephant, and eagle, and huge jaw
  Of nameless monster. A cold leaden awe
  These secrets struck into him; and unless
  Dian had chaced away that heaviness,                          140
  He might have died: but now, with cheered feel,
  He onward kept; wooing these thoughts to steal
  About the labyrinth in his soul of love.

    "What is there in thee, Moon! that thou shouldst move
  My heart so potently? When yet a child
  I oft have dried my tears when thou hast smil'd.
  Thou seem'dst my sister: hand in hand we went
  From eve to morn across the firmament.
  No apples would I gather from the tree,
  Till thou hadst cool'd their cheeks deliciously:              150
  No tumbling water ever spake romance,
  But when my eyes with thine thereon could dance:
  No woods were green enough, no bower divine,
  Until thou liftedst up thine eyelids fine:
  In sowing time ne'er would I dibble take,
  Or drop a seed, till thou wast wide awake;
  And, in the summer tide of blossoming,
  No one but thee hath heard me blithly sing
  And mesh my dewy flowers all the night.
  No melody was like a passing spright                          160
  If it went not to solemnize thy reign.
  Yes, in my boyhood, every joy and pain
  By thee were fashion'd to the self-same end;
  And as I grew in years, still didst thou blend
  With all my ardours: thou wast the deep glen;
  Thou wast the mountain-top--the sage's pen--
  The poet's harp--the voice of friends--the sun;
  Thou wast the river--thou wast glory won;
  Thou wast my clarion's blast--thou wast my steed--
  My goblet full of wine--my topmost deed:--                    170
  Thou wast the charm of women, lovely Moon!
  O what a wild and harmonized tune
  My spirit struck from all the beautiful!
  On some bright essence could I lean, and lull
  Myself to immortality: I prest
  Nature's soft pillow in a wakeful rest.
  But, gentle Orb! there came a nearer bliss--
  My strange love came--Felicity's abyss!
  She came, and thou didst fade, and fade away--
  Yet not entirely; no, thy starry sway                         180
  Has been an under-passion to this hour.
  Now I begin to feel thine orby power
  Is coming fresh upon me: O be kind,
  Keep back thine influence, and do not blind
  My sovereign vision.--Dearest love, forgive
  That I can think away from thee and live!--
  Pardon me, airy planet, that I prize
  One thought beyond thine argent luxuries!
  How far beyond!" At this a surpris'd start
  Frosted the springing verdure of his heart;                   190
  For as he lifted up his eyes to swear
  How his own goddess was past all things fair,
  He saw far in the concave green of the sea
  An old man sitting calm and peacefully.
  Upon a weeded rock this old man sat,
  And his white hair was awful, and a mat
  Of weeds were cold beneath his cold thin feet;
  And, ample as the largest winding-sheet,
  A cloak of blue wrapp'd up his aged bones,
  O'erwrought with symbols by the deepest groans                200
  Of ambitious magic: every ocean-form
  Was woven in with black distinctness; storm,
  And calm, and whispering, and hideous roar
  Were emblem'd in the woof; with every shape
  That skims, or dives, or sleeps, 'twixt cape and cape.
  The gulphing whale was like a dot in the spell,
  Yet look upon it, and 'twould size and swell
  To its huge self; and the minutest fish
  Would pass the very hardest gazer's wish,
  And shew his little eye's anatomy.                            210
  Then there was pictur'd the regality
  Of Neptune; and the sea nymphs round his state,
  In beauteous vassalage, look up and wait.
  Beside this old man lay a pearly wand,
  And in his lap a book, the which he conn'd
  So stedfastly, that the new denizen
  Had time to keep him in amazed ken,
  To mark these shadowings, and stand in awe.

    The old man rais'd his hoary head and saw
  The wilder'd stranger--seeming not to see,                    220
  His features were so lifeless. Suddenly
  He woke as from a trance; his snow-white brows
  Went arching up, and like two magic ploughs
  Furrow'd deep wrinkles in his forehead large,
  Which kept as fixedly as rocky marge,
  Till round his wither'd lips had gone a smile.
  Then up he rose, like one whose tedious toil
  Had watch'd for years in forlorn hermitage,
  Who had not from mid-life to utmost age
  Eas'd in one accent his o'er-burden'd soul,                   230
  Even to the trees. He rose: he grasp'd his stole,
  With convuls'd clenches waving it abroad,
  And in a voice of solemn joy, that aw'd
  Echo into oblivion, he said:--

    "Thou art the man! Now shall I lay my head
  In peace upon my watery pillow: now
  Sleep will come smoothly to my weary brow.
  O Jove! I shall be young again, be young!
  O shell-borne Neptune, I am pierc'd and stung
  With new-born life! What shall I do? Where go,                240
  When I have cast this serpent-skin of woe?--
  I'll swim to the syrens, and one moment listen
  Their melodies, and see their long hair glisten;
  Anon upon that giant's arm I'll be,
  That writhes about the roots of Sicily:
  To northern seas I'll in a twinkling sail,
  And mount upon the snortings of a whale
  To some black cloud; thence down I'll madly sweep
  On forked lightning, to the deepest deep,
  Where through some sucking pool I will be hurl'd              250
  With rapture to the other side of the world!
  O, I am full of gladness! Sisters three,
  I bow full hearted to your old decree!
  Yes, every god be thank'd, and power benign,
  For I no more shall wither, droop, and pine.
  Thou art the man!" Endymion started back
  Dismay'd; and, like a wretch from whom the rack
  Tortures hot breath, and speech of agony,
  Mutter'd: "What lonely death am I to die
  In this cold region? Will he let me freeze,                   260
  And float my brittle limbs o'er polar seas?
  Or will he touch me with his searing hand,
  And leave a black memorial on the sand?
  Or tear me piece-meal with a bony saw,
  And keep me as a chosen food to draw
  His magian fish through hated fire and flame?
  O misery of hell! resistless, tame,
  Am I to be burnt up? No, I will shout,
  Until the gods through heaven's blue look out!--
  O Tartarus! but some few days agone                           270
  Her soft arms were entwining me, and on
  Her voice I hung like fruit among green leaves:
  Her lips were all my own, and--ah, ripe sheaves
  Of happiness! ye on the stubble droop,
  But never may be garner'd. I must stoop
  My head, and kiss death's foot. Love! love, farewel!
  Is there no hope from thee? This horrid spell
  Would melt at thy sweet breath.--By Dian's hind
  Feeding from her white fingers, on the wind
  I see thy streaming hair! and now, by Pan,                    280
  I care not for this old mysterious man!"

    He spake, and walking to that aged form,
  Look'd high defiance. Lo! his heart 'gan warm
  With pity, for the grey-hair'd creature wept.
  Had he then wrong'd a heart where sorrow kept?
  Had he, though blindly contumelious, brought
  Rheum to kind eyes, a sting to human thought,
  Convulsion to a mouth of many years?
  He had in truth; and he was ripe for tears.
  The penitent shower fell, as down he knelt                    290
  Before that care-worn sage, who trembling felt
  About his large dark locks, and faultering spake:

    "Arise, good youth, for sacred Phœbus' sake!
  I know thine inmost bosom, and I feel
  A very brother's yearning for thee steal
  Into mine own: for why? thou openest
  The prison gates that have so long opprest
  My weary watching. Though thou know'st it not,
  Thou art commission'd to this fated spot
  For great enfranchisement. O weep no more;                    300
  I am a friend to love, to loves of yore:
  Aye, hadst thou never lov'd an unknown power,
  I had been grieving at this joyous hour.
  But even now most miserable old,
  I saw thee, and my blood no longer cold
  Gave mighty pulses: in this tottering case
  Grew a new heart, which at this moment plays
  As dancingly as thine. Be not afraid,
  For thou shalt hear this secret all display'd,
  Now as we speed towards our joyous task."                     310

    So saying, this young soul in age's mask
  Went forward with the Carian side by side:
  Resuming quickly thus; while ocean's tide
  Hung swollen at their backs, and jewel'd sands
  Took silently their foot-prints.

                                   "My soul stands
  Now past the midway from mortality,
  And so I can prepare without a sigh
  To tell thee briefly all my joy and pain.
  I was a fisher once, upon this main,                          320
  And my boat danc'd in every creek and bay;
  Rough billows were my home by night and day,--
  The sea-gulls not more constant; for I had
  No housing from the storm and tempests mad,
  But hollow rocks,--and they were palaces
  Of silent happiness, of slumberous ease:
  Long years of misery have told me so.
  Aye, thus it was one thousand years ago.
  One thousand years!--Is it then possible
  To look so plainly through them? to dispel                    330
  A thousand years with backward glance sublime?
  To breathe away as 'twere all scummy slime
  From off a crystal pool, to see its deep,
  And one's own image from the bottom peep?
  Yes: now I am no longer wretched thrall,
  My long captivity and moanings all
  Are but a slime, a thin-pervading scum,
  The which I breathe away, and thronging come
  Like things of yesterday my youthful pleasures.

    "I touch'd no lute, I sang not, trod no measures:
  I was a lonely youth on desert shores.                        341
  My sports were lonely, 'mid continuous roars,
  And craggy isles, and sea-mew's plaintive cry
  Plaining discrepant between sea and sky.
  Dolphins were still my playmates; shapes unseen
  Would let me feel their scales of gold and green,
  Nor be my desolation; and, full oft,
  When a dread waterspout had rear'd aloft
  Its hungry hugeness, seeming ready ripe
  To burst with hoarsest thunderings, and wipe                  350
  My life away like a vast sponge of fate,
  Some friendly monster, pitying my sad state,
  Has dived to its foundations, gulph'd it down,
  And left me tossing safely. But the crown
  Of all my life was utmost quietude:
  More did I love to lie in cavern rude,
  Keeping in wait whole days for Neptune's voice,
  And if it came at last, hark, and rejoice!
  There blush'd no summer eve but I would steer
  My skiff along green shelving coasts, to hear                 360
  The shepherd's pipe come clear from aery steep,
  Mingled with ceaseless bleatings of his sheep:
  And never was a day of summer shine,
  But I beheld its birth upon the brine:
  For I would watch all night to see unfold
  Heaven's gates, and Æthon snort his morning gold
  Wide o'er the swelling streams: and constantly
  At brim of day-tide, on some grassy lea,
  My nets would be spread out, and I at rest.
  The poor folk of the sea-country I blest                      370
  With daily boon of fish most delicate:
  They knew not whence this bounty, and elate
  Would strew sweet flowers on a sterile beach.

    "Why was I not contented? Wherefore reach
  At things which, but for thee, O Latmian!
  Had been my dreary death? Fool! I began
  To feel distemper'd longings: to desire
  The utmost privilege that ocean's sire
  Could grant in benediction: to be free
  Of all his kingdom. Long in misery                            380
  I wasted, ere in one extremest fit
  I plung'd for life or death. To interknit
  One's senses with so dense a breathing stuff
  Might seem a work of pain; so not enough
  Can I admire how crystal-smooth it felt,
  And buoyant round my limbs. At first I dwelt
  Whole days and days in sheer astonishment;
  Forgetful utterly of self-intent;
  Moving but with the mighty ebb and flow.
  Then, like a new fledg'd bird that first doth shew            390
  His spreaded feathers to the morrow chill,
  I tried in fear the pinions of my will.
  'Twas freedom! and at once I visited
  The ceaseless wonders of this ocean-bed.
  No need to tell thee of them, for I see
  That thou hast been a witness--it must be--
  For these I know thou canst not feel a drouth,
  By the melancholy corners of that mouth.
  So I will in my story straightway pass
  To more immediate matter. Woe, alas!                          400
  That love should be my bane! Ah, Scylla fair!
  Why did poor Glaucus ever--ever dare
  To sue thee to his heart? Kind stranger-youth!
  I lov'd her to the very white of truth,
  And she would not conceive it. Timid thing!
  She fled me swift as sea-bird on the wing,
  Round every isle, and point, and promontory,
  From where large Hercules wound up his story
  Far as Egyptian Nile. My passion grew
  The more, the more I saw her dainty hue                       410
  Gleam delicately through the azure clear:
  Until 'twas too fierce agony to bear;
  And in that agony, across my grief
  It flash'd, that Circe might find some relief--
  Cruel enchantress! So above the water
  I rear'd my head, and look'd for Phœbus' daughter.
  Ææa's isle was wondering at the moon:--
  It seem'd to whirl around me, and a swoon
  Left me dead-drifting to that fatal power.

    "When I awoke, 'twas in a twilight bower;                   420
  Just when the light of morn, with hum of bees,
  Stole through its verdurous matting of fresh trees.
  How sweet, and sweeter! for I heard a lyre,
  And over it a sighing voice expire.
  It ceased--I caught light footsteps; and anon
  The fairest face that morn e'er look'd upon
  Push'd through a screen of roses. Starry Jove!
  With tears, and smiles, and honey-words she wove
  A net whose thraldom was more bliss than all
  The range of flower'd Elysium. Thus did fall                  430
  The dew of her rich speech: "Ah! Art awake?
  O let me hear thee speak, for Cupid's sake!
  I am so oppress'd with joy! Why, I have shed
  An urn of tears, as though thou wert cold dead;
  And now I find thee living, I will pour
  From these devoted eyes their silver store,
  Until exhausted of the latest drop,
  So it will pleasure thee, and force thee stop
  Here, that I too may live: but if beyond
  Such cool and sorrowful offerings, thou art fond              440
  Of soothing warmth, of dalliance supreme;
  If thou art ripe to taste a long love dream;
  If smiles, if dimples, tongues for ardour mute,
  Hang in thy vision like a tempting fruit,
  O let me pluck it for thee." Thus she link'd
  Her charming syllables, till indistinct
  Their music came to my o'er-sweeten'd soul;
  And then she hover'd over me, and stole
  So near, that if no nearer it had been
  This furrow'd visage thou hadst never seen.                   450

    "Young man of Latmos! thus particular
  Am I, that thou may'st plainly see how far
  This fierce temptation went: and thou may'st not
  Exclaim, How then, was Scylla quite forgot?

    "Who could resist? Who in this universe?
  She did so breathe ambrosia; so immerse
  My fine existence in a golden clime.
  She took me like a child of suckling time,
  And cradled me in roses. Thus condemn'd,
  The current of my former life was stemm'd,                    460
  And to this arbitrary queen of sense
  I bow'd a tranced vassal: nor would thence
  Have mov'd, even though Amphion's harp had woo'd
  Me back to Scylla o'er the billows rude.
  For as Apollo each eve doth devise
  A new appareling for western skies;
  So every eve, nay every spendthrift hour
  Shed balmy consciousness within that bower.
  And I was free of haunts umbrageous;
  Could wander in the mazy forest-house                         470
  Of squirrels, foxes shy, and antler'd deer,
  And birds from coverts innermost and drear
  Warbling for very joy mellifluous sorrow--
  To me new born delights!

                           "Now let me borrow,
  For moments few, a temperament as stern
  As Pluto's sceptre, that my words not burn
  These uttering lips, while I in calm speech tell
  How specious heaven was changed to real hell.

    "One morn she left me sleeping: half awake                  480
  I sought for her smooth arms and lips, to slake
  My greedy thirst with nectarous camel-draughts;
  But she was gone. Whereat the barbed shafts
  Of disappointment stuck in me so sore,
  That out I ran and search'd the forest o'er.
  Wandering about in pine and cedar gloom
  Damp awe assail'd me; for there 'gan to boom
  A sound of moan, an agony of sound,
  Sepulchral from the distance all around.
  Then came a conquering earth-thunder, and rumbled             490
  That fierce complain to silence: while I stumbled
  Down a precipitous path, as if impell'd.
  I came to a dark valley.--Groanings swell'd
  Poisonous about my ears, and louder grew,
  The nearer I approach'd a flame's gaunt blue,
  That glar'd before me through a thorny brake.
  This fire, like the eye of gordian snake,
  Bewitch'd me towards; and I soon was near
  A sight too fearful for the feel of fear:
  In thicket hid I curs'd the haggard scene--                   500
  The banquet of my arms, my arbour queen,
  Seated upon an uptorn forest root;
  And all around her shapes, wizard and brute,
  Laughing, and wailing, groveling, serpenting,
  Shewing tooth, tusk, and venom-bag, and sting!
  O such deformities! Old Charon's self,
  Should he give up awhile his penny pelf,
  And take a dream 'mong rushes Stygian,
  It could not be so phantasied. Fierce, wan,
  And tyrannizing was the lady's look,                          510
  As over them a gnarled staff she shook.
  Oft-times upon the sudden she laugh'd out,
  And from a basket emptied to the rout
  Clusters of grapes, the which they raven'd quick
  And roar'd for more; with many a hungry lick
  About their shaggy jaws. Avenging, slow,
  Anon she took a branch of mistletoe,
  And emptied on't a black dull-gurgling phial:
  Groan'd one and all, as if some piercing trial
  Was sharpening for their pitiable bones.                      520
  She lifted up the charm: appealing groans
  From their poor breasts went sueing to her ear
  In vain; remorseless as an infant's bier
  She whisk'd against their eyes the sooty oil.
  Whereat was heard a noise of painful toil,
  Increasing gradual to a tempest rage,
  Shrieks, yells, and groans of torture-pilgrimage;
  Until their grieved bodies 'gan to bloat
  And puff from the tail's end to stifled throat:
  Then was appalling silence: then a sight                      530
  More wildering than all that hoarse affright;
  For the whole herd, as by a whirlwind writhen,
  Went through the dismal air like one huge Python
  Antagonizing Boreas,--and so vanish'd.
  Yet there was not a breath of wind: she banish'd
  These phantoms with a nod. Lo! from the dark
  Came waggish fauns, and nymphs, and satyrs stark,
  With dancing and loud revelry,--and went
  Swifter than centaurs after rapine bent.--
  Sighing an elephant appear'd and bow'd                        540
  Before the fierce witch, speaking thus aloud
  In human accent: "Potent goddess! chief
  Of pains resistless! make my being brief,
  Or let me from this heavy prison fly:
  Or give me to the air, or let me die!
  I sue not for my happy crown again;
  I sue not for my phalanx on the plain;
  I sue not for my lone, my widow'd wife;
  I sue not for my ruddy drops of life,
  My children fair, my lovely girls and boys!                   550
  I will forget them; I will pass these joys;
  Ask nought so heavenward, so too--too high:
  Only I pray, as fairest boon, to die,
  Or be deliver'd from this cumbrous flesh,
  From this gross, detestable, filthy mesh,
  And merely given to the cold bleak air.
  Have mercy, Goddess! Circe, feel my prayer!"

    That curst magician's name fell icy numb
  Upon my wild conjecturing: truth had come
  Naked and sabre-like against my heart.                        560
  I saw a fury whetting a death-dart;
  And my slain spirit, overwrought with fright,
  Fainted away in that dark lair of night.
  Think, my deliverer, how desolate
  My waking must have been! disgust, and hate,
  And terrors manifold divided me
  A spoil amongst them. I prepar'd to flee
  Into the dungeon core of that wild wood:
  I fled three days--when lo! before me stood
  Glaring the angry witch. O Dis, even now,                     570
  A clammy dew is beading on my brow,
  At mere remembering her pale laugh, and curse.
  "Ha! ha! Sir Dainty! there must be a nurse
  Made of rose leaves and thistledown, express,
  To cradle thee my sweet, and lull thee: yes,
  I am too flinty-hard for thy nice touch:
  My tenderest squeeze is but a giant's clutch.
  So, fairy-thing, it shall have lullabies
  Unheard of yet; and it shall still its cries
  Upon some breast more lily-feminine.                          580
  Oh, no--it shall not pine, and pine, and pine
  More than one pretty, trifling thousand years;
  And then 'twere pity, but fate's gentle shears
  Cut short its immortality. Sea-flirt!
  Young dove of the waters! truly I'll not hurt
  One hair of thine: see how I weep and sigh,
  That our heart-broken parting is so nigh.
  And must we part? Ah, yes, it must be so.
  Yet ere thou leavest me in utter woe,
  Let me sob over thee my last adieus,                          590
  And speak a blessing: Mark me! Thou hast thews
  Immortal, for thou art of heavenly race:
  But such a love is mine, that here I chase
  Eternally away from thee all bloom
  Of youth, and destine thee towards a tomb.
  Hence shalt thou quickly to the watery vast;
  And there, ere many days be overpast,
  Disabled age shall seize thee; and even then
  Thou shalt not go the way of aged men;
  But live and wither, cripple and still breathe                600
  Ten hundred years: which gone, I then bequeath
  Thy fragile bones to unknown burial.
  Adieu, sweet love, adieu!"--As shot stars fall,
  She fled ere I could groan for mercy. Stung
  And poisoned was my spirit: despair sung
  A war-song of defiance 'gainst all hell.
  A hand was at my shoulder to compel
  My sullen steps; another 'fore my eyes
  Moved on with pointed finger. In this guise
  Enforced, at the last by ocean's foam                         610
  I found me; by my fresh, my native home.
  Its tempering coolness, to my life akin,
  Came salutary as I waded in;
  And, with a blind voluptuous rage, I gave
  Battle to the swollen billow-ridge, and drave
  Large froth before me, while there yet remain'd
  Hale strength, nor from my bones all marrow drain'd.

    "Young lover, I must weep--such hellish spite
  With dry cheek who can tell? While thus my might
  Proving upon this element, dismay'd,                          620
  Upon a dead thing's face my hand I laid;
  I look'd--'twas Scylla! Cursed, cursed Circe!
  O vulture-witch, hast never heard of mercy?
  Could not thy harshest vengeance be content,
  But thou must nip this tender innocent
  Because I lov'd her?--Cold, O cold indeed
  Were her fair limbs, and like a common weed
  The sea-swell took her hair. Dead as she was
  I clung about her waist, nor ceas'd to pass
  Fleet as an arrow through unfathom'd brine,                   630
  Until there shone a fabric crystalline,
  Ribb'd and inlaid with coral, pebble, and pearl.
  Headlong I darted; at one eager swirl
  Gain'd its bright portal, enter'd, and behold!
  'Twas vast, and desolate, and icy-cold;
  And all around--But wherefore this to thee
  Who in few minutes more thyself shalt see?--
  I left poor Scylla in a niche and fled.
  My fever'd parchings up, my scathing dread
  Met palsy half way: soon these limbs became                   640
  Gaunt, wither'd, sapless, feeble, cramp'd, and lame.

    "Now let me pass a cruel, cruel space,
  Without one hope, without one faintest trace
  Of mitigation, or redeeming bubble
  Of colour'd phantasy; for I fear 'twould trouble
  Thy brain to loss of reason: and next tell
  How a restoring chance came down to quell
  One half of the witch in me.

                                "On a day,
  Sitting upon a rock above the spray,                          650
  I saw grow up from the horizon's brink
  A gallant vessel: soon she seem'd to sink
  Away from me again, as though her course
  Had been resum'd in spite of hindering force--
  So vanish'd: and not long, before arose
  Dark clouds, and muttering of winds morose.
  Old Eolus would stifle his mad spleen,
  But could not: therefore all the billows green
  Toss'd up the silver spume against the clouds.
  The tempest came: I saw that vessel's shrouds                 660
  In perilous bustle; while upon the deck
  Stood trembling creatures. I beheld the wreck;
  The final gulphing; the poor struggling souls:
  I heard their cries amid loud thunder-rolls.
  O they had all been sav'd but crazed eld
  Annull'd my vigorous cravings: and thus quell'd
  And curb'd, think on't, O Latmian! did I sit
  Writhing with pity, and a cursing fit
  Against that hell-born Circe. The crew had gone,
  By one and one, to pale oblivion;                             670
  And I was gazing on the surges prone,
  With many a scalding tear and many a groan,
  When at my feet emerg'd an old man's hand,
  Grasping this scroll, and this same slender wand.
  I knelt with pain--reached out my hand--had grasp'd
  These treasures--touch'd the knuckles--they unclasp'd--
  I caught a finger: but the downward weight
  O'erpowered me--it sank. Then 'gan abate
  The storm, and through chill aguish gloom outburst
  The comfortable sun. I was athirst                            680
  To search the book, and in the warming air
  Parted its dripping leaves with eager care.
  Strange matters did it treat of, and drew on
  My soul page after page, till well-nigh won
  Into forgetfulness; when, stupefied,
  I read these words, and read again, and tried
  My eyes against the heavens, and read again.
  O what a load of misery and pain
  Each Atlas-line bore off!--a shine of hope
  Came gold around me, cheering me to cope                      690
  Strenuous with hellish tyranny. Attend!
  For thou hast brought their promise to an end.

    "_In the wide sea there lives a forlorn wretch,
  Doom'd with enfeebled carcase to outstretch
  His loath'd existence through ten centuries,
  And then to die alone. Who can devise
  A total opposition? No one. So
  One million times ocean must ebb and flow,
  And he oppressed. Yet he shall not die,
  These things accomplish'd:--If he utterly_                    700
  _Scans all the depths of magic, and expounds
  The meanings of all motions, shapes, and sounds;
  If he explores all forms and substances
  Straight homeward to their symbol-essences;
  He shall not die. Moreover, and in chief,_
  _He must pursue this task of joy and grief
  Most piously;--all lovers tempest-tost,
  And in the savage overwhelming lost,
  He shall deposit side by side, until
  Time's creeping shall the dreary space fulfil:_               710
  _Which done, and all these labours ripened,
  A youth, by heavenly power lov'd and led,
  Shall stand before him; whom he shall direct
  How to consummate all. The youth elect
  Must do the thing, or both will be destroy'd._"--

    "Then," cried the young Endymion, overjoy'd,
  "We are twin brothers in this destiny!
  Say, I intreat thee, what achievement high
  Is, in this restless world, for me reserv'd.
  What! if from thee my wandering feet had swerv'd,             720
  Had we both perish'd?"--"Look!" the sage replied,
  "Dost thou not mark a gleaming through the tide,
  Of divers brilliances? 'tis the edifice
  I told thee of, where lovely Scylla lies;
  And where I have enshrined piously
  All lovers, whom fell storms have doom'd to die
  Throughout my bondage." Thus discoursing, on
  They went till unobscur'd the porches shone;
  Which hurryingly they gain'd, and enter'd straight.
  Sure never since king Neptune held his state                  730
  Was seen such wonder underneath the stars.
  Turn to some level plain where haughty Mars
  Has legion'd all his battle; and behold
  How every soldier, with firm foot, doth hold
  His even breast: see, many steeled squares,
  And rigid ranks of iron--whence who dares
  One step? Imagine further, line by line,
  These warrior thousands on the field supine:--
  So in that crystal place, in silent rows,
  Poor lovers lay at rest from joys and woes.--                 740
  The stranger from the mountains, breathless, trac'd
  Such thousands of shut eyes in order plac'd;
  Such ranges of white feet, and patient lips
  All ruddy,--for here death no blossom nips.
  He mark'd their brows and foreheads; saw their hair
  Put sleekly on one side with nicest care;
  And each one's gentle wrists, with reverence,
  Put cross-wise to its heart.

                                "Let us commence,
  Whisper'd the guide, stuttering with joy, even now."          750
  He spake, and, trembling like an aspen-bough,
  Began to tear his scroll in pieces small,
  Uttering the while some mumblings funeral.
  He tore it into pieces small as snow
  That drifts unfeather'd when bleak northerns blow;
  And having done it, took his dark blue cloak
  And bound it round Endymion: then struck
  His wand against the empty air times nine.--
  "What more there is to do, young man, is thine:
  But first a little patience; first undo                       760
  This tangled thread, and wind it to a clue.
  Ah, gentle! 'tis as weak as spider's skein;
  And shouldst thou break it--What, is it done so clean?
  A power overshadows thee! Oh, brave!
  The spite of hell is tumbling to its grave.
  Here is a shell; 'tis pearly blank to me,
  Nor mark'd with any sign or charactery--
  Canst thou read aught? O read for pity's sake!
  Olympus! we are safe! Now, Carian, break
  This wand against yon lyre on the pedestal."                  770

    'Twas done: and straight with sudden swell and fall
  Sweet music breath'd her soul away, and sigh'd
  A lullaby to silence.--"Youth! now strew
  These minced leaves on me, and passing through
  Those files of dead, scatter the same around,
  And thou wilt see the issue."--'Mid the sound
  Of flutes and viols, ravishing his heart,
  Endymion from Glaucus stood apart,
  And scatter'd in his face some fragments light.
  How lightning-swift the change! a youthful wight              780
  Smiling beneath a coral diadem,
  Out-sparkling sudden like an upturn'd gem,
  Appear'd, and, stepping to a beauteous corse,
  Kneel'd down beside it, and with tenderest force
  Press'd its cold hand, and wept,--and Scylla sigh'd!
  Endymion, with quick hand, the charm applied--
  The nymph arose: he left them to their joy,
  And onward went upon his high employ,
  Showering those powerful fragments on the dead.
  And, as he pass'd, each lifted up its head,                   790
  As doth a flower at Apollo's touch.
  Death felt it to his inwards: 'twas too much:
  Death fell a weeping in his charnel-house.
  The Latmian persever'd along, and thus
  All were re-animated. There arose
  A noise of harmony, pulses and throes
  Of gladness in the air--while many, who
  Had died in mutual arms devout and true,
  Sprang to each other madly; and the rest
  Felt a high certainty of being blest.                         800
  They gaz'd upon Endymion. Enchantment
  Grew drunken, and would have its head and bent.
  Delicious symphonies, like airy flowers,
  Budded, and swell'd, and, full-blown, shed full showers
  Of light, soft, unseen leaves of sounds divine.
  The two deliverers tasted a pure wine
  Of happiness, from fairy-press ooz'd out.
  Speechless they eyed each other, and about
  The fair assembly wander'd to and fro,
  Distracted with the richest overflow                          810
  Of joy that ever pour'd from heaven.

                                  ----"Away!"
  Shouted the new born god; "Follow, and pay
  Our piety to Neptunus supreme!"--
  Then Scylla, blushing sweetly from her dream,
  They led on first, bent to her meek surprise,
  Though portal columns of a giant size,
  Into the vaulted, boundless emerald.
  Joyous all follow'd, as the leader call'd,
  Down marble steps; pouring as easily                          820
  As hour-glass sand,--and fast, as you might see
  Swallows obeying the south summer's call,
  Or swans upon a gentle waterfall.

    Thus went that beautiful multitude, nor far,
  Ere from among some rocks of glittering spar,
  Just within ken, they saw descending thick
  Another multitude. Whereat more quick
  Moved either host. On a wide sand they met,
  And of those numbers every eye was wet;
  For each their old love found. A murmuring rose,              830
  Like what was never heard in all the throes
  Of wind and waters: 'tis past human wit
  To tell; 'tis dizziness to think of it.

    This mighty consummation made, the host
  Mov'd on for many a league; and gain'd, and lost
  Huge sea-marks; vanward swelling in array,
  And from the rear diminishing away,--
  Till a faint dawn surpris'd them. Glaucus cried,
  "Behold! behold, the palace of his pride!
  God Neptune's palaces!" With noise increas'd,                 840
  They shoulder'd on towards that brightening cast.
  At every onward step proud domes arose
  In prospect,--diamond gleams, and golden glows
  Of amber 'gainst their faces levelling.
  Joyous, and many as the leaves in spring,
  Still onward; still the splendour gradual swell'd.
  Rich opal domes were seen, on high upheld
  By jasper pillars, letting through their shafts
  A blush of coral. Copious wonder-draughts
  Each gazer drank; and deeper drank more near:                 850
  For what poor mortals fragment up, as mere
  As marble was there lavish, to the vast
  Of one fair palace, that far far surpass'd,
  Even for common bulk, those olden three,
  Memphis, and Babylon, and Nineveh.

    As large, as bright, as colour'd as the bow
  Of Iris, when unfading it doth shew
  Beyond a silvery shower, was the arch
  Through which this Paphian army took its march,
  Into the outer courts of Neptune's state:                     860
  Whence could be seen, direct, a golden gate,
  To which the leaders sped; but not half raught
  Ere it burst open swift as fairy thought,
  And made those dazzled thousands veil their eyes
  Like callow eagles at the first sunrise.
  Soon with an eagle nativeness their gaze
  Ripe from hue-golden swoons took all the blaze,
  And then, behold! large Neptune on his throne
  Of emerald deep: yet not exalt alone;
  At his right hand stood winged Love, and on                   870
  His left sat smiling Beauty's paragon.

    Far as the mariner on highest mast
  Can see all round upon the calmed vast,
  So wide was Neptune's hall: and as the blue
  Doth vault the waters, so the waters drew
  Their doming curtains, high, magnificent,
  Aw'd from the throne aloof;--and when storm-rent
  Disclos'd the thunder-gloomings in Jove's air;
  But sooth'd as now, flash'd sudden everywhere,
  Noiseless, sub-marine cloudlets, glittering                   880
  Death to a human eye: for there did spring
  From natural west, and east, and south, and north,
  A light as of four sunsets, blazing forth
  A gold-green zenith 'bove the Sea-God's head.
  Of lucid depth the floor, and far outspread
  As breezeless lake, on which the slim canoe
  Of feather'd Indian darts about, as through
  The delicatest air: air verily,
  But for the portraiture of clouds and sky:
  This palace floor breath-air,--but for the amaze              890
  Of deep-seen wonders motionless,--and blaze
  Of the dome pomp, reflected in extremes,
  Globing a golden sphere.

                            They stood in dreams
  Till Triton blew his horn. The palace rang;
  The Nereids danc'd; the Syrens faintly sang;
  And the great Sea-King bow'd his dripping head.
  Then Love took wing, and from his pinions shed
  On all the multitude a nectarous dew.
  The ooze-born Goddess beckoned and drew                       900
  Fair Scylla and her guides to conference;
  And when they reach'd the throned eminence
  She kist the sea-nymph's cheek,--who sat her down
  A toying with the doves. Then,--"Mighty crown
  And sceptre of this kingdom!" Venus said,
  "Thy vows were on a time to Nais paid:
  Behold!"--Two copious tear-drops instant fell
  From the God's large eyes; he smil'd delectable,
  And over Glaucus held his blessing hands.--
  "Endymion! Ah! still wandering in the bands                   910
  Of love? Now this is cruel. Since the hour
  I met thee in earth's bosom, all my power
  Have I put forth to serve thee. What, not yet
  Escap'd from dull mortality's harsh net?
  A little patience, youth! 'twill not be long,
  Or I am skilless quite: an idle tongue,
  A humid eye, and steps luxurious,
  Where these are new and strange, are ominous.
  Aye, I have seen these signs in one of heaven,
  When others were all blind; and were I given                  920
  To utter secrets, haply I might say
  Some pleasant words:--but Love will have his day.
  So wait awhile expectant. Pr'ythee soon,
  Even in the passing of thine honey-moon,
  Visit my Cytherea: thou wilt find
  Cupid well-natured, my Adonis kind;
  And pray persuade with thee--Ah, I have done,
  All blisses be upon thee, my sweet son!"--
  Thus the fair goddess: while Endymion
  Knelt to receive those accents halcyon.                       930

    Meantime a glorious revelry began
  Before the Water-Monarch. Nectar ran
  In courteous fountains to all cups outreach'd;
  And plunder'd vines, teeming exhaustless, pleach'd
  New growth about each shell and pendent lyre;
  The which, in disentangling for their fire,
  Pull'd down fresh foliage and coverture
  For dainty toying. Cupid, empire-sure,
  Flutter'd and laugh'd, and oft-times through the throng
  Made a delighted way. Then dance, and song,                   940
  And garlanding grew wild; and pleasure reign'd.
  In harmless tendril they each other chain'd,
  And strove who should be smother'd deepest in
  Fresh crush of leaves.

                          O 'tis a very sin
  For one so weak to venture his poor verse
  In such a place as this. O do not curse,
  High Muses! let him hurry to the ending.

    All suddenly were silent. A soft blending
  Of dulcet instruments came charmingly;                        950
  And then a hymn.

                   "KING of the stormy sea!
  Brother of Jove, and co-inheritor
  Of elements! Eternally before
  Thee the waves awful bow. Fast, stubborn rock,
  At thy fear'd trident shrinking, doth unlock
  Its deep foundations, hissing into foam.
  All mountain-rivers lost, in the wide home
  Of thy capacious bosom ever flow.
  Thou frownest, and old Eolus thy foe                          960
  Skulks to his cavern, 'mid the gruff complaint
  Of all his rebel tempests. Dark clouds faint
  When, from thy diadem, a silver gleam
  Slants over blue dominion. Thy bright team
  Gulphs in the morning light, and scuds along
  To bring thee nearer to that golden song
  Apollo singeth, while his chariot
  Waits at the doors of heaven. Thou art not
  For scenes like this: an empire stern hast thou;
  And it hath furrow'd that large front: yet now,               970
  As newly come of heaven, dost thou sit
  To blend and interknit
  Subdued majesty with this glad time.
  O shell-borne King sublime!
  We lay our hearts before thee evermore--
  We sing, and we adore!

    "Breathe softly, flutes;
  Be tender of your strings, ye soothing lutes;
  Nor be the trumpet heard! O vain, O vain;
  Not flowers budding in an April rain,                         980
  Nor breath of sleeping dove, nor river's flow,--
  No, nor the Eolian twang of Love's own bow,
  Can mingle music fit for the soft ear
  Of goddess Cytherea!
  Yet deign, white Queen of Beauty, thy fair eyes
  On our souls' sacrifice.

    "Bright-winged Child!
  Who has another care when thou hast smil'd?
  Unfortunates on earth, we see at last
  All death-shadows, and glooms that overcast                   990
  Our spirits, fann'd away by thy light pinions.
  O sweetest essence! sweetest of all minions!
  God of warm pulses, and dishevell'd hair,
  And panting bosoms bare!
  Dear unseen light in darkness! eclipser
  Of light in light! delicious poisoner!
  Thy venom'd goblet will we quaff until
  We fill--we fill!
  And by thy Mother's lips----"

                          Was heard no more                    1000
  For clamour, when the golden palace door
  Opened again, and from without, in shone
  A new magnificence. On oozy throne
  Smooth-moving came Oceanus the old,
  To take a latest glimpse at his sheep-fold,
  Before he went into his quiet cave
  To muse for ever--Then a lucid wave,
  Scoop'd from its trembling sisters of mid-sea,
  Afloat, and pillowing up the majesty
  Of Doris, and the Egean seer, her spouse--                   1010
  Next, on a dolphin, clad in laurel boughs,
  Theban Amphion leaning on his lute:
  His fingers went across it--All were mute
  To gaze on Amphitrite, queen of pearls,
  And Thetis pearly too.--

                          The palace whirls
  Around giddy Endymion; seeing he
  Was there far strayed from mortality.
  He could not bear it--shut his eyes in vain;
  Imagination gave a dizzier pain.                             1020
  "O I shall die! sweet Venus, be my stay!
  Where is my lovely mistress? Well-away!
  I die--I hear her voice--I feel my wing--"
  At Neptune's feet he sank. A sudden ring
  Of Nereids were about him, in kind strife
  To usher back his spirit into life:
  But still he slept. At last they interwove
  Their cradling arms, and purpos'd to convey
  Towards a crystal bower far away.

    Lo! while slow carried through the pitying crowd,
  To his inward senses these words spake aloud;                1031
  Written in star-light on the dark above:
  _Dearest Endymion! my entire love!
  How have I dwelt in fear of fate: 'tis done--
  Immortal bliss for me too hast thou won._
  _Arise then! for the hen-dove shall not hatch
  Her ready eggs, before I'll kissing snatch
  Thee into endless heaven. Awake! awake!_

    The youth at once arose: a placid lake
  Came quiet to his eyes; and forest green,                    1040
  Cooler than all the wonders he had seen,
  Lull'd with its simple song his fluttering breast.
  How happy once again in grassy nest!




ENDYMION.

BOOK IV.


  Muse of my native land! loftiest Muse!
  O first-born on the mountains! by the hues
  Of heaven on the spiritual air begot:
  Long didst thou sit alone in northern grot,
  While yet our England was a wolfish den;
  Before our forests heard the talk of men;
  Before the first of Druids was a child;--
  Long didst thou sit amid our regions wild
  Rapt in a deep prophetic solitude.
  There came an eastern voice of solemn mood:--                  10
  Yet wast thou patient. Then sang forth the Nine,
  Apollo's garland:--yet didst thou divine
  Such home-bred glory, that they cry'd in vain,
  "Come hither, Sister of the Island!" Plain
  Spake fair Ausonia; and once more she spake
  A higher summons:--still didst thou betake
  Thee to thy native hopes. O thou hast won
  A full accomplishment! The thing is done,
  Which undone, these our latter days had risen
  On barren souls. Great Muse, thou know'st what prison,
  Of flesh and bone, curbs, and confines, and frets              21
  Our spirit's wings: despondency besets
  Our pillows; and the fresh to-morrow morn
  Seems to give forth its light in very scorn
  Of our dull, uninspired, snail-paced lives.
  Long have I said, how happy he who shrives
  To thee! But then I thought on poets gone,
  And could not pray:--nor can I now--so on
  I move to the end in lowliness of heart.--

    "Ah, woe is me! that I should fondly part                    30
  From my dear native land! Ah, foolish maid!
  Glad was the hour, when, with thee, myriads bade
  Adieu to Ganges and their pleasant fields!
  To one so friendless the clear freshet yields
  A bitter coolness; the ripe grape is sour:
  Yet I would have, great gods! but one short hour
  Of native air--let me but die at home."

    Endymion to heaven's airy dome
  Was offering up a hecatomb of vows,
  When these words reach'd him. Whereupon he bows
  His head through thorny-green entanglement                     41
  Of underwood, and to the sound is bent,
  Anxious as hind towards her hidden fawn.

    "Is no one near to help me? No fair dawn
  Of life from charitable voice? No sweet saying
  To set my dull and sadden'd spirit playing?
  No hand to toy with mine? No lips so sweet
  That I may worship them? No eyelids meet
  To twinkle on my bosom? No one dies
  Before me, till from these enslaving eyes                      50
  Redemption sparkles!--I am sad and lost."

    Thou, Carian lord, hadst better have been tost
  Into a whirlpool. Vanish into air,
  Warm mountaineer! for canst thou only bear
  A woman's sigh alone and in distress?
  See not her charms! Is Phœbe passionless?
  Phœbe is fairer far--O gaze no more:--
  Yet if thou wilt behold all beauty's store,
  Behold her panting in the forest grass!
  Do not those curls of glossy jet surpass                       60
  For tenderness the arms so idly lain
  Amongst them? Feelest not a kindred pain,
  To see such lovely eyes in swimming search
  After some warm delight, that seems to perch
  Dovelike in the dim cell lying beyond
  Their upper lids?--Hist!

                            "O for Hermes' wand,
  To touch this flower into human shape!
  That woodland Hyacinthus could escape
  From his green prison, and here kneeling down                  70
  Call me his queen, his second life's fair crown!
  Ah me, how I could love!--My soul doth melt
  For the unhappy youth--Love! I have felt
  So faint a kindness, such a meek surrender
  To what my own full thoughts had made too tender,
  That but for tears my life had fled away!--
  Ye deaf and senseless minutes of the day,
  And thou, old forest, hold ye this for true,
  There is no lightning, no authentic dew
  But in the eye of love: there's not a sound,                   80
  Melodious howsoever, can confound
  The heavens and earth in one to such a death
  As doth the voice of love: there's not a breath
  Will mingle kindly with the meadow air,
  Till it has panted round, and stolen a share
  Of passion from the heart!"--

                                Upon a bough
  He leant, wretched. He surely cannot now
  Thirst for another love: O impious,
  That he can even dream upon it thus!--                         90
  Thought he, "Why am I not as are the dead,
  Since to a woe like this I have been led
  Through the dark earth, and through the wondrous sea?
  Goddess! I love thee not the less: from thee
  By Juno's smile I turn not--no, no, no--
  While the great waters are at ebb and flow.--
  I have a triple soul! O fond pretence--
  For both, for both my love is so immense,
  I feel my heart is cut in twain for them."

    And so he groan'd, as one by beauty slain.                  100
  The lady's heart beat quick, and he could see
  Her gentle bosom heave tumultuously.
  He sprang from his green covert: there she lay,
  Sweet as a muskrose upon new-made hay;
  With all her limbs on tremble, and her eyes
  Shut softly up alive. To speak he tries.
  "Fair damsel, pity me! forgive that I
  Thus violate thy bower's sanctity!
  O pardon me, for I am full of grief--
  Grief born of thee, young angel! fairest thief!               110
  Who stolen hast away the wings wherewith
  I was to top the heavens. Dear maid, sith
  Thou art my executioner, and I feel
  Loving and hatred, misery and weal,
  Will in a few short hours be nothing to me,
  And all my story that much passion slew me;
  Do smile upon the evening of my days:
  And, for my tortur'd brain begins to craze,
  Be thou my nurse; and let me understand
  How dying I shall kiss that lily hand.--                      120
  Dost weep for me? Then should I be content.
  Scowl on, ye fates! until the firmament
  Outblackens Erebus, and the full-cavern'd earth
  Crumbles into itself. By the cloud girth
  Of Jove, those tears have given me a thirst
  To meet oblivion."--As her heart would burst
  The maiden sobb'd awhile, and then replied:
  "Why must such desolation betide
  As that thou speakest of? Are not these green nooks
  Empty of all misfortune? Do the brooks                        130
  Utter a gorgon voice? Does yonder thrush,
  Schooling its half-fledg'd little ones to brush
  About the dewy forest, whisper tales?--
  Speak not of grief, young stranger, or cold snails
  Will slime the rose to night. Though if thou wilt,
  Methinks 'twould be a guilt--a very guilt--
  Not to companion thee, and sigh away
  The light--the dusk--the dark--till break of day!"
  "Dear lady," said Endymion, "'tis past:
  I love thee! and my days can never last.                      140
  That I may pass in patience still speak:
  Let me have music dying, and I seek
  No more delight--I bid adieu to all.
  Didst thou not after other climates call,
  And murmur about Indian streams?"--Then she,
  Sitting beneath the midmost forest tree,
  For pity sang this roundelay----

        "O Sorrow,
        Why dost borrow
  The natural hue of health, from vermeil lips?--               150
        To give maiden blushes
        To the white rose bushes?
  Or is it thy dewy hand the daisy tips?

        "O Sorrow,
        Why dost borrow
  The lustrous passion from a falcon-eye?--
        To give the glow-worm light?
        Or, on a moonless night,
  To tinge, on syren shores, the salt sea-spry?

        "O Sorrow,                                              160
        Why dost borrow
  The mellow ditties from a mourning tongue?--
        To give at evening pale
        Unto the nightingale,
  That thou mayst listen the cold dews among?

        "O Sorrow,
        Why dost borrow
  Heart's lightness from the merriment of May?--
        A lover would not tread
        A cowslip on the head,                                  170
  Though he should dance from eve till peep of day--
        Nor any drooping flower
        Held sacred for thy bower,
  Wherever he may sport himself and play.

        "To Sorrow,
        I bade good-morrow,
  And thought to leave her far away behind;
        But cheerly, cheerly,
        She loves me dearly;
  She is so constant to me, and so kind:                        180
        I would deceive her
        And so leave her,
  But ah! she is so constant and so kind.

  "Beneath my palm trees, by the river side,
  I sat a weeping: in the whole world wide
  There was no one to ask me why I wept,--
        And so I kept
  Brimming the water-lily cups with tears
        Cold as my fears.

  "Beneath my palm trees, by the river side,                    190
  I sat a weeping: what enamour'd bride,
  Cheated by shadowy wooer from the clouds,
        But hides and shrouds
  Beneath dark palm trees by a river side?
  "And as I sat, over the light blue hills
  There came a noise of revellers: the rills
  Into the wide stream came of purple hue--
        'Twas Bacchus and his crew!
  The earnest trumpet spake, and silver thrills
  From kissing cymbals made a merry din--                       200
        'Twas Bacchus and his kin!
  Like to a moving vintage down they came,
  Crown'd with green leaves, and faces all on flame;
  All madly dancing through the pleasant valley,
        To scare thee, Melancholy!
  O then, O then, thou wast a simple name!
  And I forgot thee, as the berried holly
  By shepherds is forgotten, when, in June,
  Tall chesnuts keep away the sun and moon:--
        I rush'd into the folly!                                210

  "Within his car, aloft, young Bacchus stood,
  Trifling his ivy-dart, in dancing mood,
        With sidelong laughing;
  And little rills of crimson wine imbrued
  His plump white arms, and shoulders, enough white
        For Venus' pearly bite:
  And near him rode Silenus on his ass,
  Pelted with flowers as he on did pass
        Tipsily quaffing.

  "Whence came ye, merry Damsels! whence came ye!
  So many, and so many, and such glee?                          221
  Why have ye left your bowers desolate,
        Your lutes, and gentler fate?--
  'We follow Bacchus! Bacchus on the wing,
        A conquering!
  Bacchus, young Bacchus! good or ill betide,
  We dance before him thorough kingdoms wide:--
  Come hither, lady fair, and joined be
        To our wild minstrelsy!'

  "Whence came ye, jolly Satyrs! whence came ye!                230
  So many, and so many, and such glee?
  Why have ye left your forest haunts, why left
        Your nuts in oak-tree cleft?--
  'For wine, for wine we left our kernel tree;
  For wine we left our heath, and yellow brooms,
        And cold mushrooms;
  For wine we follow Bacchus through the earth;
  Great God of breathless cups and chirping mirth!--
  Come hither, lady fair, and joined be
  To our mad minstrelsy!'                                       240

  "Over wide streams and mountains great we went,
  And, save when Bacchus kept his ivy tent,
  Onward the tiger and the leopard pants,
        With Asian elephants:
  Onward these myriads--with song and dance,
  With zebras striped, and sleek Arabians' prance,
  Web-footed alligators, crocodiles,
  Bearing upon their scaly backs, in files,
  Plump infant laughers mimicking the coil
  Of seamen, and stout galley-rowers' toil:                     250
  With toying oars and silken sails they glide,
        Nor care for wind and tide.

  "Mounted on panthers' furs and lions' manes,
  From rear to van they scour about the plains;
  A three days' journey in a moment done:
  And always, at the rising of the sun,
  About the wilds they hunt with spear and horn,
        On spleenful unicorn.

  "I saw Osirian Egypt kneel adown
        Before the vine-wreath crown!                           260
  I saw parch'd Abyssinia rouse and sing
        To the silver cymbals' ring!
  I saw the whelming vintage hotly pierce
        Old Tartary the fierce!
  The kings of Inde their jewel-sceptres vail,
  And from their treasures scatter pearled hail;
  Great Brahma from his mystic heaven groans,
        And all his priesthood moans;
  Before young Bacchus' eye-wink turning pale.--
  Into these regions came I following him,                      270
  Sick hearted, weary--so I took a whim
  To stray away into these forests drear
        Alone, without a peer:
  And I have told thee all thou mayest hear.

        "Young stranger!
        I've been a ranger
  In search of pleasure throughout every clime:
        Alas, 'tis not for me!
        Bewitch'd I sure must be,
  To lose in grieving all my maiden prime.                      280

        "Come then, Sorrow!
        Sweetest Sorrow!
  Like an own babe I nurse thee on my breast:
        I thought to leave thee
        And deceive thee,
  But now of all the world I love thee best.

        "There is not one,
        No, no, not one
  But thee to comfort a poor lonely maid;
        Thou art her mother,                                    290
        And her brother,
  Her playmate, and her wooer in the shade."

    O what a sigh she gave in finishing,
  And look, quite dead to every worldly thing!
  Endymion could not speak, but gazed on her;
  And listened to the wind that now did stir
  About the crisped oaks full drearily,
  Yet with as sweet a softness as might be
  Remember'd from its velvet summer song.
  At last he said: "Poor lady, how thus long                    300
  Have I been able to endure that voice?
  Fair Melody! kind Syren! I've no choice;
  I must be thy sad servant evermore:
  I cannot choose but kneel here and adore.
  Alas, I must not think--by Phœbe, no!
  Let me not think, soft Angel! shall it be so?
  Say, beautifullest, shall I never think?
  O thou could'st foster me beyond the brink
  Of recollection! make my watchful care
  Close up its bloodshot eyes, nor see despair!                 310
  Do gently murder half my soul, and I
  Shall feel the other half so utterly!--
  I'm giddy at that cheek so fair and smooth;
  O let it blush so ever! let it soothe
  My madness! let it mantle rosy-warm
  With the tinge of love, panting in safe alarm.--
  This cannot be thy hand, and yet it is;
  And this is sure thine other softling--this
  Thine own fair bosom, and I am so near!
  Wilt fall asleep? O let me sip that tear!                     320
  And whisper one sweet word that I may know
  This is this world--sweet dewy blossom!"--_Woe!
  Woe! Woe to that Endymion! Where is he?_--
  Even these words went echoing dismally
  Through the wide forest--a most fearful tone,
  Like one repenting in his latest moan;
  And while it died away a shade pass'd by,
  As of a thunder cloud. When arrows fly
  Through the thick branches, poor ring-doves sleek forth
  Their timid necks and tremble; so these both                  330
  Leant to each other trembling, and sat so
  Waiting for some destruction--when lo,
  Foot-feather'd Mercury appear'd sublime
  Beyond the tall tree tops; and in less time
  Than shoots the slanted hail-storm, down he dropt
  Towards the ground; but rested not, nor stopt
  One moment from his home: only the sward
  He with his wand light touch'd, and heavenward
  Swifter than sight was gone--even before
  The teeming earth a sudden witness bore                       340
  Of his swift magic. Diving swans appear
  Above the crystal circlings white and clear;
  And catch the cheated eye in wild surprise,
  How they can dive in sight and unseen rise--
  So from the turf outsprang two steeds jet-black,
  Each with large dark blue wings upon his back.
  The youth of Caria plac'd the lovely dame
  On one, and felt himself in spleen to tame
  The other's fierceness. Through the air they flew,
  High as the eagles. Like two drops of dew                     350
  Exhal'd to Phœbus' lips, away they are gone,
  Far from the earth away--unseen, alone,
  Among cool clouds and winds, but that the free,
  The buoyant life of song can floating be
  Above their heads, and follow them untir'd.--
  Muse of my native land, am I inspir'd?
  This is the giddy air, and I must spread
  Wide pinions to keep here; nor do I dread
  Or height, or depth, or width, or any chance
  Precipitous: I have beneath my glance                         360
  Those towering horses and their mournful freight.
  Could I thus sail, and see, and thus await
  Fearless for power of thought, without thine aid?--
  There is a sleepy dusk, an odorous shade
  From some approaching wonder, and behold
  Those winged steeds, with snorting nostrils bold
  Snuff at its faint extreme, and seem to tire,
  Dying to embers from their native fire!

    There curl'd a purple mist around them; soon,
  It seem'd as when around the pale new moon                    370
  Sad Zephyr droops the clouds like weeping willow:
  'Twas Sleep slow journeying with head on pillow.
  For the first time, since he came nigh dead born
  From the old womb of night, his cave forlorn
  Had he left more forlorn; for the first time,
  He felt aloof the day and morning's prime--
  Because into his depth Cimmerian
  There came a dream, shewing how a young man,
  Ere a lean bat could plump its wintery skin,
  Would at high Jove's empyreal footstool win                   380
  An immortality, and how espouse
  Jove's daughter, and be reckon'd of his house.
  Now was he slumbering towards heaven's gate,
  That he might at the threshold one hour wait
  To hear the marriage melodies, and then
  Sink downward to his dusky cave again.
  His litter of smooth semilucent mist,
  Diversely ting'd with rose and amethyst,
  Puzzled those eyes that for the centre sought;
  And scarcely for one moment could be caught                   390
  His sluggish form reposing motionless.
  Those two on winged steeds, with all the stress
  Of vision search'd for him, as one would look
  Athwart the sallows of a river nook
  To catch a glance at silver throated eels,--
  Or from old Skiddaw's top, when fog conceals
  His rugged forehead in a mantle pale,
  With an eye-guess towards some pleasant vale
  Descry a favourite hamlet faint and far.

    These raven horses, though they foster'd are                400
  Of earth's splenetic fire, dully drop
  Their full-veined ears, nostrils blood wide, and stop;
  Upon the spiritless mist have they outspread
  Their ample feathers, are in slumber dead,--
  And on those pinions, level in mid air,
  Endymion sleepeth and the lady fair.
  Slowly they sail, slowly as icy isle
  Upon a calm sea drifting: and meanwhile
  The mournful wanderer dreams. Behold! he walks
  On heaven's pavement; brotherly he talks                      410
  To divine powers: from his hand full fain
  Juno's proud birds are pecking pearly grain:
  He tries the nerve of Phœbus' golden bow,
  And asketh where the golden apples grow:
  Upon his arm he braces Pallas' shield,
  And strives in vain to unsettle and wield
  A Jovian thunderbolt: arch Hebe brings
  A full-brimm'd goblet, dances lightly, sings
  And tantalizes long; at last he drinks,
  And lost in pleasure at her feet he sinks,                    420
  Touching with dazzled lips her starlight hand.
  He blows a bugle,--an ethereal band
  Are visible above: the Seasons four,--
  Green-kyrtled Spring, flush Summer, golden store
  In Autumn's sickle, Winter frosty hoar,
  Join dance with shadowy Hours; while still the blast,
  In swells unmitigated, still doth last
  To sway their floating morris. "Whose is this?
  Whose bugle?" he inquires: they smile--"O Dis!
  Why is this mortal here? Dost thou not know                   430
  Its mistress' lips? Not thou?--'Tis Dian's: lo!
  She rises crescented!" He looks, 'tis she,
  His very goddess: good-bye earth, and sea,
  And air, and pains, and care, and suffering;
  Good-bye to all but love! Then doth he spring
  Towards her, and awakes--and, strange, o'erhead,
  Of those same fragrant exhalations bred,
  Beheld awake his very dream: the gods
  Stood smiling; merry Hebe laughs and nods;
  And Phœbe bends towards him crescented.                       440
  O state perplexing! On the pinion bed,
  Too well awake, he feels the panting side
  Of his delicious lady. He who died
  For soaring too audacious in the sun,
  Where that same treacherous wax began to run,
  Felt not more tongue-tied than Endymion.
  His heart leapt up as to its rightful throne,
  To that fair shadow'd passion puls'd its way--
  Ah, what perplexity! Ah, well a day!
  So fond, so beauteous was his bed-fellow,                     450
  He could not help but kiss her: then he grew
  Awhile forgetful of all beauty save
  Young Phœbe's, golden hair'd; and so 'gan crave
  Forgiveness: yet he turn'd once more to look
  At the sweet sleeper,--all his soul was shook,--
  She press'd his hand in slumber; so once more
  He could not help but kiss her and adore.
  At this the shadow wept, melting away.
  The Latmian started up: "Bright goddess, stay!
  Search my most hidden breast! By truth's own tongue,
  I have no dædale heart: why is it wrung                       461
  To desperation? Is there nought for me,
  Upon the bourne of bliss, but misery?"

    These words awoke the stranger of dark tresses:
  Her dawning love-look rapt Endymion blesses
  With 'haviour soft. Sleep yawned from underneath.
  "Thou swan of Ganges, let us no more breathe
  This murky phantasm! thou contented seem'st
  Pillow'd in lovely idleness, nor dream'st
  What horrors may discomfort thee and me.                      470
  Ah, shouldst thou die from my heart-treachery!--
  Yet did she merely weep--her gentle soul
  Hath no revenge in it: as it is whole
  In tenderness, would I were whole in love!
  Can I prize thee, fair maid, till price above,
  Even when I feel as true as innocence?
  I do, I do.--What is this soul then? Whence
  Came it? It does not seem my own, and I
  Have no self-passion or identity.
  Some fearful end must be: where, where is it?                 480
  By Nemesis, I see my spirit flit
  Alone about the dark--Forgive me, sweet:
  Shall we away?" He rous'd the steeds: they beat
  Their wings chivalrous into the clear air,
  Leaving old Sleep within his vapoury lair.

    The good-night blush of eve was waning slow,
  And Vesper, risen star, began to throe
  In the dusk heavens silvery, when they
  Thus sprang direct towards the Galaxy.
  Nor did speed hinder converse soft and strange--              490
  Eternal oaths and vows they interchange,
  In such wise, in such temper, so aloof
  Up in the winds, beneath a starry roof,
  So witless of their doom, that verily
  'Tis well nigh past man's search their hearts to see;
  Whether they wept, or laugh'd, or griev'd, or toy'd--
  Most like with joy gone mad, with sorrow cloy'd.

    Fell facing their swift flight, from ebon streak,
  The moon put forth a little diamond peak,
  No bigger than an unobserved star,                            500
  Or tiny point of fairy scymetar;
  Bright signal that she only stoop'd to tie
  Her silver sandals, ere deliciously
  She bow'd into the heavens her timid head.
  Slowly she rose, as though she would have fled,
  While to his lady meek the Carian turn'd,
  To mark if her dark eyes had yet discern'd
  This beauty in its birth--Despair! despair!
  He saw her body fading gaunt and spare
  In the cold moonshine. Straight he seiz'd her wrist;
  It melted from his grasp: her hand he kiss'd,                 511
  And, horror! kiss'd his own--he was alone.
  Her steed a little higher soar'd, and then
  Dropt hawkwise to the earth.

                               There lies a den,
  Beyond the seeming confines of the space
  Made for the soul to wander in and trace
  Its own existence, of remotest glooms.
  Dark regions are around it, where the tombs
  Of buried griefs the spirit sees, but scarce                  520
  One hour doth linger weeping, for the pierce
  Of new-born woe it feels more inly smart:
  And in these regions many a venom'd dart
  At random flies; they are the proper home
  Of every ill: the man is yet to come
  Who hath not journeyed in this native hell.
  But few have ever felt how calm and well
  Sleep may be had in that deep den of all.
  There anguish does not sting; nor pleasure pall:
  Woe-hurricanes beat ever at the gate,                         530
  Yet all is still within and desolate.
  Beset with plainful gusts, within ye hear
  No sound so loud as when on curtain'd bier
  The death-watch tick is stifled. Enter none
  Who strive therefore: on the sudden it is won.
  Just when the sufferer begins to burn,
  Then it is free to him; and from an urn,
  Still fed by melting ice, he takes a draught--
  Young Semele such richness never quaft
  In her maternal longing. Happy gloom!                         540
  Dark Paradise! where pale becomes the bloom
  Of health by due; where silence dreariest
  Is most articulate; where hopes infest;
  Where those eyes are the brightest far that keep
  Their lids shut longest in a dreamless sleep.
  O happy spirit-home! O wondrous soul!
  Pregnant with such a den to save the whole
  In thine own depth. Hail, gentle Carian!
  For, never since thy griefs and woes began,
  Hast thou felt so content: a grievous feud                    550
  Hath let thee to this Cave of Quietude.
  Aye, his lull'd soul was there, although upborne
  With dangerous speed: and so he did not mourn
  Because he knew not whither he was going.
  So happy was he, not the aerial blowing
  Of trumpets at clear parley from the east
  Could rouse from that fine relish, that high feast.
  They stung the feather'd horse: with fierce alarm
  He flapp'd towards the sound. Alas, no charm
  Could lift Endymion's head, or he had view'd                  560
  A skyey mask, a pinion'd multitude,--
  And silvery was its passing: voices sweet
  Warbling the while as if to lull and greet
  The wanderer in his path. Thus warbled they,
  While past the vision went in bright array.

    "Who, who from Dian's feast would be away?
  For all the golden bowers of the day
  Are empty left? Who, who away would be
  From Cynthia's wedding and festivity?
  Not Hesperus: lo! upon his silver wings                       570
  He leans away for highest heaven and sings,
  Snapping his lucid fingers merrily!--
  Ah, Zephyrus! art here, and Flora too!
  Ye tender bibbers of the rain and dew,
  Young playmates of the rose and daffodil,
  Be careful, ere ye enter in, to fill
        Your baskets high
  With fennel green, and balm, and golden pines,
  Savory, latter-mint, and columbines,
  Cool parsley, basil sweet, and sunny thyme;                   580
  Yea, every flower and leaf of every clime,
  All gather'd in the dewy morning: hie
        Away! fly, fly!--
  Crystalline brother of the belt of heaven,
  Aquarius! to whom king Jove has given
  Two liquid pulse streams 'stead of feather'd wings,
  Two fan-like fountains,--thine illuminings
        For Dian play:
  Dissolve the frozen purity of air;
  Let thy white shoulders silvery and bare                      590
  Shew cold through watery pinions; make more bright
  The Star-Queen's crescent on her marriage night:
        Haste, haste away!--
  Castor has tamed the planet Lion, see!
  And of the Bear has Pollux mastery:
  A third is in the race! who is the third,
  Speeding away swift as the eagle bird?
        The ramping Centaur!
  The Lion's mane's on end: the Bear how fierce!
  The Centaur's arrow ready seems to pierce                     600
  Some enemy: far forth his bow is bent
  Into the blue of heaven. He'll be shent,
        Pale unrelentor,
  When he shall hear the wedding lutes a playing.--
  Andromeda! sweet woman! why delaying
  So timidly among the stars: come hither!
  Join this bright throng, and nimbly follow whither
        They all are going.
  Danae's Son, before Jove newly bow'd,
  Has wept for thee, calling to Jove aloud.                     610
  Thee, gentle lady, did he disenthral:
  Ye shall for ever live and love, for all
        Thy tears are flowing.--
  By Daphne's fright, behold Apollo!--"

                                        More
  Endymion heard not: down his steed him bore,
  Prone to the green head of a misty hill.

    His first touch of the earth went nigh to kill.
  "Alas!" said he, "were I but always borne
  Through dangerous winds, had but my footsteps worn
  A path in hell, for ever would I bless                        621
  Horrors which nourish an uneasiness
  For my own sullen conquering: to him
  Who lives beyond earth's boundary, grief is dim,
  Sorrow is but a shadow: now I see
  The grass; I feel the solid ground--Ah, me!
  It is thy voice--divinest! Where?--who? who
  Left thee so quiet on this bed of dew?
  Behold upon this happy earth we are;
  Let us ay love each other; let us fare                        630
  On forest-fruits, and never, never go
  Among the abodes of mortals here below,
  Or be by phantoms duped. O destiny!
  Into a labyrinth now my soul would fly,
  But with thy beauty will I deaden it.
  Where didst thou melt too? By thee will I sit
  For ever: let our fate stop here--a kid
  I on this spot will offer: Pan will bid
  Us live in peace, in love and peace among
  His forest wildernesses. I have clung                         640
  To nothing, lov'd a nothing, nothing seen
  Or felt but a great dream! O I have been
  Presumptuous against love, against the sky,
  Against all elements, against the tie
  Of mortals each to each, against the blooms
  Of flowers, rush of rivers, and the tombs
  Of heroes gone! Against his proper glory
  Has my own soul conspired: so my story
  Will I to children utter, and repent.
  There never liv'd a mortal man, who bent                      650
  His appetite beyond his natural sphere,
  But starv'd and died. My sweetest Indian, here,
  Here will I kneel, for thou redeemed hast
  My life from too thin breathing: gone and past
  Are cloudy phantasms. Caverns lone, farewel!
  And air of visions, and the monstrous swell
  Of visionary seas! No, never more
  Shall airy voices cheat me to the shore
  Of tangled wonder, breathless and aghast.
  Adieu, my daintiest Dream! although so vast                   660
  My love is still for thee. The hour may come
  When we shall meet in pure elysium.
  On earth I may not love thee; and therefore
  Doves will I offer up, and sweetest store
  All through the teeming year: so thou wilt shine
  On me, and on this damsel fair of mine,
  And bless our simple lives. My Indian bliss!
  My river-lily bud! one human kiss!
  One sigh of real breath--one gentle squeeze,
  Warm as a dove's nest among summer trees,                     670
  And warm with dew at ooze from living blood!
  Whither didst melt? Ah, what of that!--all good
  We'll talk about--no more of dreaming.--Now,
  Where shall our dwelling be? Under the brow
  Of some steep mossy hill, where ivy dun
  Would hide us up, although spring leaves were none;
  And where dark yew trees, as we rustle through,
  Will drop their scarlet berry cups of dew?
  O thou wouldst joy to live in such a place;
  Dusk for our loves, yet light enough to grace                 680
  Those gentle limbs on mossy bed reclin'd:
  For by one step the blue sky shouldst thou find,
  And by another, in deep dell below,
  See, through the trees, a little river go
  All in its mid-day gold and glimmering.
  Honey from out the gnarled hive I'll bring,
  And apples, wan with sweetness, gather thee,--
  Cresses that grow where no man may them see,
  And sorrel untorn by the dew-claw'd stag:
  Pipes will I fashion of the syrinx flag,                      690
  That thou mayst always know whither I roam,
  When it shall please thee in our quiet home
  To listen and think of love. Still let me speak;
  Still let me dive into the joy I seek,--
  For yet the past doth prison me. The rill,
  Thou haply mayst delight in, will I fill
  With fairy fishes from the mountain tarn,
  And thou shall feed them from the squirrel's barn.
  Its bottom will I strew with amber shells,
  And pebbles blue from deep enchanted wells.                   700
  Its sides I'll plant with dew-sweet eglantine,
  And honeysuckles full of clear bee-wine.
  I will entice this crystal rill to trace
  Love's silver name upon the meadow's face.
  I'll kneel to Vesta, for a flame of fire;
  And to god Phœbus, for a golden lyre;
  To Empress Dian, for a hunting spear;
  To Vesper, for a taper silver-clear,
  That I may see thy beauty through the night;
  To Flora, and a nightingale shall light                       710
  Tame on thy finger; to the River-gods,
  And they shall bring thee taper fishing-rods
  Of gold, and lines of Naiads' long bright tress.
  Heaven shield thee for thine utter loveliness!
  Thy mossy footstool shall the altar be
  'Fore which I'll bend, bending, dear love, to thee:
  Those lips shall be my Delphos, and shall speak
  Laws to my footsteps, colour to my cheek,
  Trembling or stedfastness to this same voice,
  And of three sweetest pleasurings the choice:                 720
  And that affectionate light, those diamond things,
  Those eyes, those passions, those supreme pearl springs,
  Shall be my grief, or twinkle me to pleasure.
  Say, is not bliss within our perfect seisure?
  O that I could not doubt?"

                              The mountaineer
  Thus strove by fancies vain and crude to clear
  His briar'd path to some tranquillity.
  It gave bright gladness to his lady's eye,
  And yet the tears she wept were tears of sorrow;              730
  Answering thus, just as the golden morrow
  Beam'd upward from the vallies of the east:
  "O that the flutter of this heart had ceas'd,
  Or the sweet name of love had pass'd away.
  Young feathor'd tyrant! by a swift decay
  Wilt thou devote this body to the earth:
  And I do think that at my very birth
  I lisp'd thy blooming titles inwardly;
  For at the first, first dawn and thought of thee,
  With uplift hands I blest the stars of heaven.                740
  Art thou not cruel? Ever have I striven
  To think thee kind, but ah, it will not do!
  When yet a child, I heard that kisses drew
  Favour from thee, and so I gave and gave
  To the void air, bidding them find out love:
  But when I came to feel how far above
  All fancy, pride, and fickle maidenhood,
  All earthly pleasure, all imagin'd good,
  Was the warm tremble of a devout kiss,--
  Even then, that moment, at the thought of this,               750
  Fainting I fell into a bed of flowers,
  And languish'd there three days. Ye milder powers,
  Am I not cruelly wrong'd? Believe, believe
  Me, dear Endymion, were I to weave
  With my own fancies garlands of sweet life,
  Thou shouldst be one of all. Ah, bitter strife!
  I may not be thy love: I am forbidden--
  Indeed I am--thwarted, affrighted, chidden,
  By things I trembled at, and gorgon wrath.
  Twice hast thou ask'd whither I went: henceforth              760
  Ask me no more! I may not utter it,
  Nor may I be thy love. We might commit
  Ourselves at once to vengeance; we might die;
  We might embrace and die: voluptuous thought!
  Enlarge not to my hunger, or I'm caught
  In trammels of perverse deliciousness.
  No, no, that shall not be: thee will I bless,
  And bid a long adieu."

                          The Carian
  No word return'd: both lovelorn, silent, wan,                 770
  Into the vallies green together went.
  Far wandering, they were perforce content
  To sit beneath a fair lone beechen tree;
  Nor at each other gaz'd, but heavily
  Por'd on its hazle cirque of shedded leaves.

    Endymion! unhappy! it nigh grieves
  Me to behold thee thus in last extreme:
  Ensky'd ere this, but truly that I deem
  Truth the best music in a first-born song.
  Thy lute-voic'd brother will I sing ere long,                 780
  And thou shall aid--hast thou not aided me?
  Yes, moonlight Emperor! felicity
  Has been thy meed for many thousand years;
  Yet often have I, on the brink of tears,
  Mourn'd as if yet thou wert a forester;--
  Forgetting the old tale.

                            He did not stir
  His eyes from the dead leaves, or one small pulse
  Of joy he might have felt. The spirit culls
  Unfaded amaranth, when wild it strays                         790
  Through the old garden-ground of boyish days.
  A little onward ran the very stream
  By which he took his first soft poppy dream;
  And on the very bark 'gainst which he leant
  A crescent he had carv'd, and round it spent
  His skill in little stars. The teeming tree
  Had swollen and green'd the pious charactery,
  But not ta'en out. Why, there was not a slope
  Up which he had not fear'd the antelope;
  And not a tree, beneath whose rooty shade                     800
  He had not with his tamed leopards play'd;
  Nor could an arrow light, or javelin,
  Fly in the air where his had never been--
  And yet he knew it not.

                          O treachery!
  Why does his lady smile, pleasing her eye
  With all his sorrowing? He sees her not.
  But who so stares on him? His sister sure!
  Peona of the woods!--Can she endure--
  Impossible--how dearly they embrace!                          810
  His lady smiles; delight is in her face;
  It is no treachery.

                      "Dear brother mine!
  Endymion, weep not so! Why shouldst thou pine
  When all great Latmos so exalt will be?
  Thank the great gods, and look not bitterly;
  And speak not one pale word, and sigh no more.
  Sure I will not believe thou hast such store
  Of grief, to last thee to my kiss again.
  Thou surely canst not bear a mind in pain,                    820
  Come hand in hand with one so beautiful.
  Be happy both of you! for I will pull
  The flowers of autumn for your coronals.
  Pan's holy priest for young Endymion calls;
  And when he is restor'd, thou, fairest dame,
  Shalt be our queen. Now, is it not a shame
  To see ye thus,--not very, very sad?
  Perhaps ye are too happy to be glad:
  O feel as if it were a common day;
  Free-voic'd as one who never was away.                        830
  No tongue shall ask, whence come ye? but ye shall
  Be gods of your own rest imperial.
  Not even I, for one whole month, will pry
  Into the hours that have pass'd us by,
  Since in my arbour I did sing to thee.
  O Hermes! on this very night will be
  A hymning up to Cynthia, queen of light;
  For the soothsayers old saw yesternight
  Good visions in the air,--whence will befal,
  As say these sages, health perpetual                          840
  To shepherds and their flocks; and furthermore,
  In Dian's face they read the gentle lore:
  Therefore for her these vesper-carols are.
  Our friends will all be there from nigh and far.
  Many upon thy death have ditties made;
  And many, even now, their foreheads shade
  With cypress, on a day of sacrifice.
  New singing for our maids shalt thou devise,
  And pluck the sorrow from our huntsmen's brows.
  Tell me, my lady-queen, how to espouse                        850
  This wayward brother to his rightful joys!
  His eyes are on thee bent, as thou didst poise
  His fate most goddess-like. Help me, I pray,
  To lure--Endymion, dear brother, say
  What ails thee?" He could bear no more, and so
  Bent his soul fiercely like a spiritual bow,
  And twang'd it inwardly, and calmly said:
  "I would have thee my only friend, sweet maid!
  My only visitor! not ignorant though,
  That those deceptions which for pleasure go                   860
  'Mong men, are pleasures real as real may be:
  But there are higher ones I may not see,
  If impiously an earthly realm I take.
  Since I saw thee, I have been wide awake
  Night after night, and day by day, until
  Of the empyrean I have drunk my fill.
  Let it content thee, Sister, seeing me
  More happy than betides mortality.
  A hermit young, I'll live in mossy cave,
  Where thou alone shalt come to me, and lave                   870
  Thy spirit in the wonders I shall tell.
  Through me the shepherd realm shall prosper well;
  For to thy tongue will I all health confide.
  And, for my sake, let this young maid abide
  With thee as a dear sister. Thou alone,
  Peona, mayst return to me. I own
  This may sound strangely: but when, dearest girl,
  Thou seest it for my happiness, no pearl
  Will trespass down those cheeks. Companion fair!
  Wilt be content to dwell with her, to share                   880
  This sister's love with me?" Like one resign'd
  And bent by circumstance, and thereby blind
  In self-commitment, thus that meek unknown:
  "Aye, but a buzzing by my ears has flown,
  Of jubilee to Dian:--truth I heard!
  Well then, I see there is no little bird,
  Tender soever, but is Jove's own care.
  Long have I sought for rest, and, unaware,
  Behold I find it! so exalted too!
  So after my own heart! I knew, I knew                         890
  There was a place untenanted in it:
  In that same void white Chastity shall sit,
  And monitor me nightly to lone slumber.
  With sanest lips I vow me to the number
  Of Dian's sisterhood; and, kind lady,
  With thy good help, this very night shall see
  My future days to her fane consecrate."

    As feels a dreamer what doth most create
  His own particular fright, so these three felt:
  Or like one who, in after ages, knelt                         900
  To Lucifer or Baal, when he'd pine
  After a little sleep: or when in mine
  Far under-ground, a sleeper meets his friends
  Who know him not. Each diligently bends
  Towards common thoughts and things for very fear;
  Striving their ghastly malady to cheer,
  By thinking it a thing of yes and no,
  That housewives talk of. But the spirit-blow
  Was struck, and all were dreamers. At the last
  Endymion said: "Are not our fates all cast?                   910
  Why stand we here? Adieu, ye tender pair!
  Adieu!" Whereat those maidens, with wild stare,
  Walk'd dizzily away. Pained and hot
  His eyes went after them, until they got
  Near to a cypress grove, whose deadly maw,
  In one swift moment, would what then he saw
  Engulph for ever. "Stay!" he cried, "ah, stay!
  Turn, damsels! hist! one word I have to say.
  Sweet Indian, I would see thee once again.
  It is a thing I dote on: so I'd fain,                         920
  Peona, ye should hand in hand repair
  Into those holy groves, that silent are
  Behind great Dian's temple. I'll be yon,
  At vesper's earliest twinkle--they are gone--
  But once, once, once again--" At this he press'd
  His hands against his face, and then did rest
  His head upon a mossy hillock green,
  And so remain'd as he a corpse had been
  All the long day; save when he scantly lifted
  His eyes abroad, to see how shadows shifted                   930
  With the slow move of time,--sluggish and weary
  Until the poplar tops, in journey dreary,
  Had reach'd the river's brim. Then up he rose,
  And, slowly as that very river flows,
  Walk'd towards the temple grove with this lament:
  "Why such a golden eve? The breeze is sent
  Careful and soft, that not a leaf may fall
  Before the serene father of them all
  Bows down his summer head below the west.
  Now am I of breath, speech, and speed possest,                940
  But at the setting I must bid adieu
  To her for the last time. Night will strew
  On the damp grass myriads of lingering leaves,
  And with them shall I die; nor much it grieves
  To die, when summer dies on the cold sward.
  Why, I have been a butterfly, a lord
  Of flowers, garlands, love-knots, silly posies,
  Groves, meadows, melodies, and arbour roses;
  My kingdom's at its death, and just it is
  That I should die with it: so in all this                     950
  We miscal grief, bale, sorrow, heartbreak, woe,
  What is there to plain of? By Titan's foe
  I am but rightly serv'd." So saying, he
  Tripp'd lightly on, in sort of deathful glee;
  Laughing at the clear stream and setting sun,
  As though they jests had been: nor had he done
  His laugh at nature's holy countenance,
  Until that grove appear'd, as if perchance,
  And then his tongue with sober seemlihed
  Gave utterance as he entered: "Ha!" I said,                   960
  "King of the butterflies; but by this gloom,
  And by old Rhadamanthus' tongue of doom,
  This dusk religion, pomp of solitude,
  And the Promethean clay by thief endued,
  By old Saturnus' forelock, by his head
  Shook with eternal palsy, I did wed
  Myself to things of light from infancy;
  And thus to be cast out, thus lorn to die,
  Is sure enough to make a mortal man
  Grow impious." So he inwardly began                           970
  On things for which no wording can be found;
  Deeper and deeper sinking, until drown'd
  Beyond the reach of music: for the choir
  Of Cynthia he heard not, though rough briar
  Nor muffling thicket interpos'd to dull
  The vesper hymn, far swollen, soft and full,
  Through the dark pillars of those sylvan aisles.
  He saw not the two maidens, nor their smiles,
  Wan as primroses gather'd at midnight
  By chilly finger'd spring. "Unhappy wight!                    980
  Endymion!" said Peona, "we are here!
  What wouldst thou ere we all are laid on bier?"
  Then he embrac'd her, and his lady's hand
  Press'd, saying: "Sister, I would have command,
  If it were heaven's will, on our sad fate."
  At which that dark-eyed stranger stood elate
  And said, in a new voice, but sweet as love,
  To Endymion's amaze: "By Cupid's dove,
  And so thou shalt! and by the lily truth
  Of my own breast thou shalt, beloved youth!"                  990
  And as she spake, into her face there came
  Light, as reflected from a silver flame:
  Her long black hair swell'd ampler, in display
  Full golden; in her eyes a brighter day
  Dawn'd blue and full of love. Aye, he beheld
  Phœbe, his passion! joyous she upheld
  Her lucid bow, continuing thus: "Drear, drear
  Has our delaying been; but foolish fear
  Withheld me first; and then decrees of fate;
  And then 'twas fit that from this mortal state               1000
  Thou shouldst, my love, by some unlook'd for change
  Be spiritualiz'd. Peona, we shall range
  These forests, and to thee they safe shall be
  As was thy cradle; hither shalt thou flee
  To meet us many a time." Next Cynthia bright
  Peona kiss'd, and bless'd with fair good night:
  Her brother kiss'd her too, and knelt adown
  Before his goddess, in a blissful swoon.
  She gave her fair hands to him, and behold,
  Before three swiftest kisses he had told,                    1010
  They vanish'd far away!--Peona went
  Home through the gloomy wood in wonderment.

  THE END.

_T. Miller, Printer, Noble Street, Cheapside._


