
ODE.


   WHEN, to my deadly pleasure,
   When to my lively torment,
   Lady, mine eyes remainéd
   Joinéd, alas! to your beams.

   With violence of heavenly
   Beauty, tied to virtue;
   Reason abashed retiréd;
   Gladly my senses yielded.

   Gladly my senses yielding,
   Thus to betray my heart’s fort,
   Left me devoid of all life.

   They to the beamy suns went,
   Where, by the death of all deaths,
   Find to what harm they hastened.

   Like to the silly Sylvan,
   Burned by the light he best liked,
   When with a fire he first met.

   Yet, yet, a life to their death,
   Lady you have reservéd;
   Lady the life of all love.

   For though my sense be from me,
   And I be dead, who want sense,
   Yet do we both live in you.

   Turnéd anew, by your means,
   Unto the flower that aye turns,
   As you, alas! my sun bends.

   Thus do I fall to rise thus;
   Thus do I die to live thus;
   Changed to a change, I change not.

   Thus may I not be from you;
   Thus be my senses on you;
   Thus what I think is of you;
   Thus what I seek is in you;
   All what I am, it is you.




VERSES.


_To the tune of a Neapolitan song_, _which beginneth_, “_No_, _no_, _no_,
                                  _no_.”

   NO, no, no, no, I cannot hate my foe,
      Although with cruel fire,
      First thrown on my desire,
   She sacks my rendered sprite;
      For so fair a flame embraces
      All the places,
   Where that heat of all heats springeth,
   That it bringeth
      To my dying heart some pleasure,
      Since his treasure
   Burneth bright in fairest light.  No, no, no, no.

   No, no, no, no, I cannot hate my foe,
      Although with cruel fire,
      First thrown on my desire,
   She sacks my rendered sprite;
      Since our lives be not immortal,
      But to mortal
   Fetters tied, do wait the hour
   Of death’s power,
      They have no cause to be sorry
      Who with glory
   End the way, where all men stay.  No, no, no, no.

   No, no, no, no, I cannot hate my foe,
      Although with cruel fire,
      First thrown on my desire,
   She sacks my rendered sprite;
      No man doubts, whom beauty killeth,
      Fair death feeleth,
   And in whom fair death proceedeth,
   Glory breedeth:
      So that I, in her beams dying,
      Glory trying,
   Though in pain, cannot complain.  No, no, no, no.



SONG.


                 _To the tune of a Neapolitan Villanel_.

   ALL my sense thy sweetness gained;
   Thy fair hair my heart enchained;
   My poor reason thy words moved,
   So that thee, like heaven, I loved.

   Fa, la, la, leridan, dan, dan, dan, deridan:
      Dan, dan, dan, deridan, deridan, dei:
   While to my mind the outside stood,
   For messenger of inward good.

   Nor thy sweetness sour is deemed;
   Thy hair not worth a hair esteemed;
   Reason hath thy words removed,
   Finding that but words they proved.

   Fa, la, la, leridan, dan, dan, dan, deridan,
      Dan, dan, dan, deridan, deridan, dei:
   For no fair sign can credit win,
   If that the substance fail within.

   No more in thy sweetness glory,
   For thy knitting hair be sorry;
   Use thy words but to bewail thee
   That no more thy beams avail thee;
         Dan, dan,
         Dan, dan,
   Lay not thy colours more to view,
   Without the picture be found true.

   Woe to me, alas, she weepeth!
   Fool! in me what folly creepeth?
   Was I to blaspheme enraged,
   Where my soul I have engaged?
         Dan, dan,
         Dan, dan,
   And wretched I must yield to this;
   The fault I blame her chasteness is.

   Sweetness! sweetly pardon folly;
   Tie me, hair, your captive wholly:
   Words!  O words of heavenly knowledge!
   Know, my words their faults acknowledge;
         Dan, dan,
         Dan, dan,
   And all my life I will confess,
   The less I love, I live the less.



TRANSLATION.


_From_ “_La Diana de Monte-Mayor_,” _in Spanish_: _where Sireno_, _a
shepherd_, _whose mistress Diana had utterly forsaken him_, _pulling out
a little of her hair_, _wrapped about with green silk_, _to the hair he
thus bewailed himself_.

   WHAT changes here, O hair,
      I see, since I saw you!
   How ill fits you this green to wear,
      For hope, the colour due!
   Indeed, I well did hope,
      Though hope were mixed with fear,
   No other shepherd should have scope
      Once to approach this hair.

   Ah hair! how many days
      My Dian made me show,
   With thousand pretty childish plays,
      If I ware you or no:
   Alas, how oft with tears,—
      O tears of guileful breast!—
   She seeméd full of jealous fears,
      Whereat I did but jest.

   Tell me, O hair of gold,
      If I then faulty be,
   That trust those killing eyes I would,
      Since they did warrant me?
   Have you not seen her mood,
      What streams of tears she spent,
   ’Till that I sware my faith so stood,
      As her words had it bent?

   Who hath such beauty seen
      In one that changeth so?
   Or where one’s love so constant been,
      Who ever saw such woe?
   Ah, hair! are you not grieved
      To come from whence you be,
   Seeing how once you saw I lived,
      To see me as you see?

   On sandy bank of late,
      I saw this woman sit;
   Where, “Sooner die than change my state,”
      She with her finger writ:
   Thus my belief was staid,
      Behold Love’s mighty hand
   On things were by a woman said,
      And written in the sand.

_The same Sireno in_ “_Monte-Mayor_,” _holding his mistress’s glass
before her_, _and looking upon her while she viewed herself_, _thus
sang_:—

   Of this high grace, with bliss conjoined,
      No farther debt on me is laid,
   Since that in self-same metal coined,
      Sweet lady, you remain well paid;

   For if my place give me great pleasure,
   Having before my nature’s treasure,
      In face and eyes unmatchéd being,
      You have the same in my hands, seeing
   What in your face mine eyes do measure.

   Nor think the match unevenly made,
      That of those beams in you do tarry,
   The glass to you but gives a shade,
      To me mine eyes the true shape carry;
         For such a thought most highly prized,
         Which ever hath Love’s yoke despised,
      Better than one captived perceiveth,
      Though he the lively form receiveth,
         The other sees it but disguised.



SONNETS.


   THE dart, the beams, the sting, so strong I prove,
      Which my chief part doth pass through, parch, and tie,
   That of the stroke, the heat, and knot of love,
      Wounded, inflamed, knit to the death, I die.

   Hardened and cold, far from affection’s snare
      Was once my mind, my temper, and my life;
   While I that sight, desire, and vow forbare,
      Which to avoid, quench, lose, nought boasted strife.

   Yet will not I grief, ashes, thraldom change
      For others’ ease, their fruit, or free estate;
   So brave a shot, dear fire, and beauty strange,
      Bid me pierce, burn, and bind, long time and late,
   And in my wounds, my flames, and bonds, I find
   A salve, fresh air, and bright contented mind.

                                * * * * *

   VIRTUE, beauty, and speech, did strike, wound, charm,
      My heart, eyes, ears, with wonder, love, delight,
   First, second, last, did bind, enforce, and arm,
      His works, shows, suits, with wit, grace, and vows’ might,

   Thus honour, liking, trust, much, far, and deep,
      Held, pierced, possessed, my judgment, sense, and will,
   Till wrongs, contempt, deceit, did grow, steal, creep,
      Bands, favour, faith, to break, defile, and kill,

   Then grief, unkindness, proof, took, kindled, taught,
      Well-grounded, noble, due, spite, rage, disdain:
   But ah, alas! in vain my mind, sight, thought,
      Doth him, his face, his words, leave, shun, refrain.
   For nothing, time, nor place, can loose, quench, ease
   Mine own embracéd, sought, knot, fire, disease.



WOOING-STUFF.


   FAINT amorist, what, dost thou think
   To taste Love’s honey, and not drink
   One dram of gall? or to devour
   A world of sweet, and taste no sour?
   Dost thou ever think to enter
   Th’ Elysian fields, that dar’st not venture
   In Charon’s barge? a lover’s mind
   Must use to sail with every wind.
   He that loves and fears to try,
   Learns his mistress to deny.
   Doth she chide thee? ’tis to show it,
   That thy coldness makes her do it:
   Is she silent? is she mute?
   Silence fully grants thy suit:
   Doth she pout, and leave the room?
   Then she goes to bid thee come:
   Is she sick? why then be sure,
   She invites thee to the cure:
   Doth she cross thy suit with “No?”
   Tush, she loves to hear thee woo:
   Doth she call the faith of man
   In question?  Nay, she loves thee than;
   And if e’er she makes a blot,
   She’s lost if that thou hit’st her not.
   He that after ten denials,
   Dares attempt no farther trials,
   Hath no warrant to acquire
   The dainties of his chaste desire.



SONNETS


   SINCE shunning pain, I ease can never find;
      Since bashful dread seeks where he knows me harmed;
      Since will is won, and stoppéd ears are charmed;
   Since force doth faint, and sight doth make me blind;
   Since loosing long, the faster still I bind;
      Since naked sense can conquer reason armed;
      Since heart, in chilling fear, with ice is warmed;
   In fine, since strife of thought but mars the mind,
      I yield, O Love, unto thy loathed yoke,
   Yet craving law of arms, whose rule doth teach,
      That, hardly used, who ever prison broke,
   In justice quit, of honour made no breach:
      Whereas, if I a grateful guardian have,
      Thou art my lord, and I thy vowéd slave.

   When Love puffed up with rage of high disdain,
      Resolved to make me pattern of his might,
      Like foe, whose wits inclined to deadly spite,
   Would often kill, to breed more feeling pain;
   He would not, armed with beauty, only reign
      On those affects which easily yield to sight;
      But virtue sets so high, that reason’s light,
   For all his strife can only bondage gain:
      So that I live to pay a mortal fee,
   Dead palsy-sick of all my chiefest parts,
      Like those whom dreams make ugly monsters see,
   And can cry help with naught but groans and starts:
      Longing to have, having no wit to wish,
      To starving minds such is god Cupid’s dish.



SONG.


_To the tune of_ “_Non credo gia che piu infelice amante_.”

   THE nightingale, as soon as April bringeth
      Unto her rested sense a perfect waking,
   While late bare earth, proud of new clothing, springeth,
      Sings out her woes, a thorn her song-book making;
      And mournfully bewailing,
   Her throat in tunes expresseth
   What grief her breast oppresseth,
      For Tereus’ force on her chaste will prevailing.
   O Philomela fair!  O take some gladness,
   That here is juster cause of plaintful sadness:
   Thine earth now springs, mine fadeth;
   Thy thorn without, my thorn my heart invadeth.

                                   II.

      Alas! she hath no other cause of anguish,
   But Tereus’ love, on her by strong hand wroken,
      Wherein she suffering, all her spirits languish,
   Full womanlike, complains her will was broken,
      But I, who daily craving,
   Cannot have to content me,
   Have more cause to lament me,
      Since wanting is more woe than too much having.
   O Philomela fair!  O take some gladness,
   That here is juster cause of plaintful sadness:
   Thine earth now springs, mine fadeth;
   Thy thorn without, my thorn my heart invadeth.



SONG.


                 _To the tune of_ “_Basciami vita mia_.”

   SLEEP, baby mine, Desire’s nurse, Beauty, singeth;
      Thy cries, O baby, set mine head on aching:
      The babe cries, “’Way, thy love doth keep me waking.”

   Lully, lully, my babe, Hope cradle bringeth
      Unto my children alway good rest taking:
      The babe cries, “Way, thy love doth keep me waking.”

   Since, baby mine, from me thy watching springeth,
      Sleep then a little, pap Content is making;
      The babe cries, “Nay, for that abide I waking.”

                                    I.

   THE scourge of life, and death’s extreme disgrace;
      The smoke of hell, the monster calléd Pain:
   Long shamed to be accursed in every place,
      By them who of his rude resort complain;
   Like crafty wretch, by time and travel taught,
      His ugly evil in others’ good to hide;
   Late harbours in her face, whom Nature wrought
      As treasure-house where her best gifts do bide;
   And so by privilege of sacred seat,
      A seat where beauty shines and virtue reigns,
   He hopes for some small praise, since she hath great,
      Within her beams wrapping his cruel stains.
   Ah, saucy Pain, let not thy terror last,
   More loving eyes she draws, more hate thou hast.

                                   II.

   Woe! woe to me, on me return the smart:
      My burning tongue hath bred my mistress pain?
   For oft in pain, to pain my painful heart,
      With her due praise did of my state complain.
   I praised her eyes, whom never chance doth move;
      Her breath, which makes a sour answer sweet;
   Her milken breasts, the nurse of child-like love;
      Her legs, O legs! her aye well-stepping feet:
   Pain heard her praise, and full of inward fire,
      (First sealing up my heart as prey of his)
   He flies to her, and, boldened with desire,
      Her face, this age’s praise, the thief doth kiss.
   O Pain!  I now recant the praise I gave,
   And swear she is not worthy thee to have.

                                   III.

      Thou pain, the only guest of loathed Constraint;
   The child of Curse, man’s weakness foster-child;
      Brother to Woe, and father of Complaint:
   Thou Pain, thou hated Pain, from heaven exiled,
      How hold’st thou her whose eyes constraint doth fear,
   Whom cursed do bless; whose weakness virtues arm;
      Who others’ woes and plaints can chastely bear:
   In whose sweet heaven angels of high thoughts swarm?
      What courage strange hath caught thy caitiff heart?
   Fear’st not a face that oft whole hearts devours?
      Or art thou from above bid play this part,
   And so no help ’gainst envy of those powers?
      If thus, alas, yet while those parts have woe;
      So stay her tongue, that she no more say, “O.”

                                   IV.

      And have I heard her say, “O cruel pain!”
   And doth she know what mould her beauty bears?
      Mourns she in truth, and thinks that others feign?
   Fears she to feel, and feels not others’ fears?
   Or doth she think all pain the mind forbears?
      That heavy earth, not fiery spirits, may plain?
   That eyes weep worse than heart in bloody tears?
      That sense feels more than what doth sense contain?
   No, no, she is too wise, she knows her face
      Hath not such pain as it makes others have:
   She knows the sickness of that perfect place
      Hath yet such health, as it my life can save.
   But this, she thinks, our pain high cause excuseth,
   Where her, who should rule pain, false pain abuseth.

                                * * * * *

   LIKE as the dove, which seeléd up doth fly,
      Is neither freed, nor yet to service bound;
   But hopes to gain some help by mounting high,
      Till want of force do force her fall to ground:
   Right so my mind, caught by his guiding eye,
      And thence cast off where his sweet hurt he found,
   Hath neither leave to live, nor doom to die;
      Nor held in evil, nor suffered to be sound.
   But with his wings of fancies up he goes,
      To high conceits, whose fruits are oft but small;
   Till wounded, blind, and wearied spirit, lose
      Both force to fly, and knowledge where to fall:
   O happy dove, if she no bondage tried!
   More happy I, might I in bondage bide!

                                * * * * *

   IN wonted walks, since wonted fancies change,
      Some cause there is, which of strange cause doth rise:
   For in each thing whereto mine eye doth range,
      Part of my pain, me-seems, engravéd lies.
   The rocks, which were of constant mind the mark,
      In climbing steep, now hard refusal show;
   The shading woods seem now my sun to dark,
      And stately hills disdain to look so low.
   The restful caves now restless visions give;
      In dales I see each way a hard ascent:
   Like late-mown meads, late cut from joy I live;
      Alas, sweet brooks do in my tears augment:
   Rocks, woods, hills, caves, dales, meads, brooks, answer me;
   Infected minds infect each thing they see.
   IF I could think how these my thoughts to leave,
      Or thinking still, my thoughts might have good end;
   If rebel sense would reason’s law receive;
      Or reason foiled, would not in vain contend:
   Then might I think what thoughts were best to think:
   Then might I wisely swim, or gladly sink.

   If either you would change your cruel heart,
      Or, cruel still, time did your beauties stain:
   If from my soul this love would once depart,
      Or for my love some love I might obtain;
   Then might I hope a change, or ease of mind,
   By your good help, or in myself, to find.

   But since my thoughts in thinking still are spent.
      With reason’s strife, by senses overthrown;
   You fairer still, and still more cruel bent,
      I loving still a love that loveth none:
   I yield and strive, I kiss and curse the pain,
   Thought, reason, sense, time, You, and I, maintain.



A FAREWELL.


   OFT have I mused, but now at length I find
      Why those that die, men say, they do depart:
   Depart: a word so gentle to my mind,
      Weakly did seem to paint Death’s ugly dart.

   But now the stars, with their strange course, do bind
      Me one to leave, with whom I leave my heart;
   I hear a cry of spirits faint and blind,
      That parting thus, my chiefest part I part.

   Part of my life, the loathéd part to me,
      Lives to impart my weary clay some breath;
   But that good part wherein all comforts be,
      Now dead, doth show departure is a death:

   Yea, worse than death, death parts both woe and joy,
   From joy I part, still living in annoy.

                                * * * * *

   FINDING those beams, which I must ever love,
      To mar my mind, and with my hurt to please,
   I deemed it best, some absence for to prove,
      If farther place might further me to ease.

   My eyes thence drawn, where livéd all their light,
      Blinded forthwith in dark despair did lie,
   Like to the mole, with want of guiding sight,
      Deep plunged in earth, deprivéd of the sky.

   In absence blind, and wearied with that woe,
      To greater woes, by presence, I return;
   Even as the fly, which to the flame doth go,
      Pleased with the light, that his small corse doth burn:

   Fair choice I have, either to live or die
   A blinded mole, or else a burnéd fly.



THE SEVEN WONDERS OF ENGLAND.


                                    I.

   NEAR Wilton sweet, huge heaps of stones are found,
      But so confused, that neither any eye
      Can count them just, nor Reason reason try,
   What force brought them to so unlikely ground.

   To stranger weights my mind’s waste soil is bound,
      Of passion-hills, reaching to Reason’s sky,
   From Fancy’s earth, passing all number’s bound,
      Passing all guess, whence into me should fly
   So mazed a mass; or, if in me it grows,
   A simple soul should breed so mixéd woes.

                                   II.

      The Bruertons have a lake, which, when the sun
   Approaching warms, not else, dead logs up sends
   From hideous depth; which tribute, when it ends,
      Sore sign it is the lord’s last thread is spun.

      My lake is Sense, whose still streams never run
   But when my sun her shining twins there bends;
      Then from his depth with force in her begun,
   Long drownéd hopes to watery eyes it lends;
      But when that fails my dead hopes up to take,
      Their master is fair warned his will to make.

                                   III.

      We have a fish, by strangers much admired,
   Which caught, to cruel search yields his chief part:
   With gall cut out, closed up again by art,
      Yet lives until his life be new required.

      A stranger fish myself, not yet expired,
   Tho’, rapt with Beauty’s hook, I did impart
      Myself unto th’ anatomy desired,
   Instead of gall, leaving to her my heart:
      Yet live with thoughts closed up, ’till that she will,
      By conquest’s right, instead of searching, kill.

                                   IV.

      Peak hath a cave, whose narrow entries find
   Large rooms within where drops distil amain:
   Till knit with cold, though there unknown remain,
      Deck that poor place with alabaster lined.

      Mine eyes the strait, the roomy cave, my mind;
   Whose cloudy thoughts let fall an inward rain
      Of sorrow’s drops, till colder reason bind
   Their running fall into a constant vein
      Of truth, far more than alabaster pure,
      Which, though despised, yet still doth truth endure.

                                    V.

      A field there is, where, if a stake oe prest
   Deep in the earth, what hath in earth receipt,
   Is changed to stone in hardness, cold, and weight,
      The wood above doth soon consuming rest.

      The earth her ears; the stake is my request;
   Of which, how much may pierce to that sweet seat,
      To honour turned, doth dwell in honour’s nest,
   Keeping that form, though void of wonted heat;
      But all the rest, which fear durst not apply,
      Failing themselves, with withered conscience die.

                                   VI.

      Of ships by shipwreck cast on Albion’s coast,
   Which rotting on the rocks, their death to die:
   From wooden bones and blood of pitch doth fly
      A bird, which gets more life than ship had lost.

      My ship, Desire, with wind of Lust long tost,
   Brake on fair cliffs of constant Chastity;
      Where plagued for rash attempt, gives up his ghost;
   So deep in seas of virtue, beauties lie:
      But of this death flies up the purest love,
      Which seeming less, yet nobler life doth move.

                                   VII.

      These wonders England breeds; the last remains—
   A lady, in despite of Nature, chaste,
   On whom all love, in whom no love is placed,
      Where Fairness yields to Wisdom’s shortest reins.

      A humble pride, a scorn that favour stains;
   A woman’s mould, but like an angel graced;
   An angel’s mind, but in a woman cased;
      A heaven on earth, or earth that heaven contains:
   Now thus this wonder to myself I frame;
   She is the cause that all the rest I am.

                                * * * * *

   THOU blind man’s mark; thou fool’s self-chosen snare,
      Fond fancy’s scum, and dregs of scattered thought:
   Band of all evils; cradle of causeless care;
      Thou web of will, whose end is never wrought:

      Desire! Desire!  I have too dearly bought,
   With price of mangled mind, thy worthless ware;
      Too long, too long, asleep thou hast me brought
   Who shouldst my mind to higher things prepare;

      But yet in vain thou hast my ruin sought;
   In vain thou mad’st me to vain things aspire;
   In vain thou kindlest all thy smoky fire:
      For Virtue hath this better lesson taught,
   Within myself to seek my only hire,
   Desiring nought but how to kill Desire.



FROM EARTH TO HEAVEN.


   LEAVE me, O love! which reachest but to dust;
      And thou, my mind, aspire to higher things:
   Grow rich in that which never taketh rust;
      Whatever fades, but fading pleasure brings.

   Draw in thy beams, and humble all thy might
      To that sweet yoke where lasting freedoms be,
   Which breaks the clouds, and opens forth the light
      That doth both shine, and give us sight to see.

   O take fast hold! let that light be thy guide,
      In this small course which birth draws out to death,
   And think how evil becometh him to slide,
      Who seeketh heaven, and comes from heavenly breath.
         Then farewell, world, thy uttermost I see,
         Eternal Love, maintain thy life in me.

                     SPLENDIDIS LONGUM VALEDICO NUGIS

