
CHAPTER XXIII.

     Such was our fallen father's fate,
     Yet better than mine own;
     He shared his exile with his mate,
     I'm banish'd forth alone.

     WALLER

I WILL not attempt to describe the mixture of indignation and regret
with which Ravenswood left the seat which had belonged to his ancestors.
The terms in which Lady Ashton's billet was couched rendered it
impossible for him, without being deficient in that spirit of which he
perhaps had too much, to remain an instant longer within its walls.
The Marquis, who had his share in the affront, was, nevertheless, still
willing to make some efforts at conciliation. He therefore suffered his
kinsman to depart alone, making him promise, however, that he would wait
for him at the small inn called the Tod's Hole, situated, as our readers
may be pleased to recollect, half-way betwixt Ravenswood Castle and
Wolf's Crag, and about five Scottish miles distant from each. Here the
Marquis proposed to join the Master of Ravenswood, either that night or
the next morning. His own feelings would have induced him to have left
the castle directly, but he was loth to forfeit, without at least one
effort, the advantages which he had proposed from his visit to the Lord
Keeper; and the Master of Ravenswood was, even in the very heat of his
resentment, unwilling to foreclose any chance of reconciliation which
might arise out of the partiality which Sir William Ashton had shown
towards him, as well as the intercessory arguments of his noble kinsman.
He himself departed without a moment's delay, farther than was necessary
to make this arrangement.

At first he spurred his horse at a quick pace through an avenue of the
park, as if, by rapidity of motion, he could stupify the confusion of
feelings with which he was assailed. But as the road grew wilder and
more sequestered, and when the trees had hidden the turrets of the
castle, he gradually slackened his pace, as if to indulge the painful
reflections which he had in vain endeavoured to repress. The path in
which he found himself led him to the Mermaiden's Fountain, and to the
cottage of Alice; and the fatal influence which superstitious belief
attached to the former spot, as well as the admonitions which had
been in vain offered to him by the inhabitant of the latter, forced
themselves upon his memory. "Old saws speak truth," he said to himself,
"and the Mermaiden's Well has indeed witnessed the last act of rashness
of the heir of Ravenswood. Alice spoke well," he continued, "and I am
in the situation which she foretold; or rather, I am more deeply
dishonoured--not the dependant and ally of the destroyer of my father's
house, as the old sibyl presaged, but the degraded wretch who has
aspired to hold that subordinate character, and has been rejected with
disdain."

We are bound to tell the tale as we have received it; and, considering
the distance of the time, and propensity of those through whose mouths
it has passed to the marvellous, this could not be called a Scottish
story unless it manifested a tinge of Scottish superstition. As
Ravenswood approached the solitary fountain, he is said to have met with
the following singular adventure: His horse, which was moving slowly
forward, suddenly interrupted its steady and composed pace, snorted,
reared, and, though urged by the spur, refused to proceed, as if some
object of terror had suddenly presented itself. On looking to the
fountain, Ravenswood discerned a female figure, dressed in a white, or
rather greyish, mantle, placed on the very spot on which Lucy Ashton
had reclined while listening to the fatal tale of love. His immediate
impression was that she had conjectured by which path he would traverse
the park on his departure, and placed herself at this well-known and
sequestered place of rendezvous, to indulge her own sorrow and his
parting interview. In this belief he jumped from his horse, and,
making its bridle fast to a tree, walked hastily towards the
fountain, pronouncing eagerly, yet under his breath, the words, "Miss
Ashton!--Lucy!"

The figure turned as he addressed it, and displayed to his wondering
eyes the features, not of Lucy Ashton, but of old blind Alice. The
singularity of her dress, which rather resembled a shroud than the
garment of a living woman; the appearance of her person, larger, as
it struck him, than it usually seemed to be; above all, the strange
circumstance of a blind, infirm, and decrepit person being found alone
and at a distance from her habitation (considerable, if her infirmities
be taken into account), combined to impress him with a feeling of wonder
approaching to fear. As he approached, she arose slowly from her seat,
held her shrivelled hand up as if to prevent his coming more near,
and her withered lips moved fast, although no sound issued from them.
Ravenswood stopped; and as, after a moment's pause, he again advanced
towards her, Alice, or her apparition, moved or glided backwards towards
the thicket, still keeping her face turned towards him. The trees soon
hid the form from his sight; and, yielding to the strong and terrific
impression that the being which he had seen was not of this world, the
Master of Ravenswood remained rooted to the ground whereon he had
stood when he caught his last view of her. At length, summoning up his
courage, he advanced to the spot on which the figure had seemed to
be seated; but neither was there pressure of the grass nor any other
circumstance to induce him to believe that what he had seen was real and
substantial.

Full of those strange thoughts and confused apprehensions which awake
in the bosom of one who conceives he has witnessed some preternatural
appearance, the Master of Ravenswood walked back towards his horse,
frequently, however, looking behind him, not without apprehension, as if
expecting that the vision would reappear. But the apparition, whether
it was real or whether it was the creation of a heated and agitated
imagination, returned not again; and he found his horse sweating and
terrified, as if experiencing that agony of fear with which the presence
of a supernatural being is supposed to agitate the brute creation. The
Master mounted, and rode slowly forward, soothing his steed from time
to time, while the animal seemed internally to shrink and shudder, as
if expecting some new object of fear at the opening of every glade.
The rider, after a moment's consideration, resolved to investigate the
matter further. "Can my eyes have deceived me," he said, "and deceived
me for such a space of time? Or are this woman's infirmities but
feigned, in order to excite compassion? And even then, her motion
resembled not that of a living and existing person. Must I adopt the
popular creed, and think that the unhappy being has formed a league with
the powers of darkness? I am determined to be resolved; I will not brook
imposition even from my own eyes."

In this uncertainty he rode up to the little wicket of Alice's garden.
Her seat beneath the birch-tree was vacant, though the day was pleasant
and the sun was high. He approached the hut, and heard from within the
sobs and wailing of a female. No answer was returned when he knocked,
so that, after a moment's pause, he lifted the latch and entered. It
was indeed a house of solitude and sorrow. Stretched upon her miserable
pallet lay the corpse of the last retainer of the house of Ravenswood
who still abode on their paternal domains! Life had but shortly
departed; and the little girl by whom she had been attended in her last
moments was wringing her hands and sobbing, betwixt childish fear and
sorrow, over the body of her mistress.

The Master of Ravenswood had some difficulty to compose the terrors
of the poor child, whom his unexpected appearance had at first rather
appalled than comforted; and when he succeeded, the first expression
which the girl used intimated that "he had come too late." Upon
inquiring the meaning of this expression, he learned that the deceased,
upon the first attack of the mortal agony, had sent a peasant to the
castle to beseech an interview of the Master of Ravenswood, and had
expressed the utmost impatience for his return. But the messengers of
the poor are tardy and negligent: the fellow had not reached the castle,
as was afterwards learned, until Ravenswood had left it, and had then
found too much amusement among the retinue of the strangers to return in
any haste to the cottage of Alice. Meantime her anxiety of mind seemed
to increase with the agony of her body; and, to use the phrase of
Babie, her only attendant, "she prayed powerfully that she might see
her master's son once more, and renew her warning." She died just as the
clock in the distant village tolled one; and Ravenswood remembered, with
internal shuddering, that he had heard the chime sound through the wood
just before he had seen what he was now much disposed to consider as the
spectre of the deceased.

It was necessary, as well from his respect to the departed as in common
humanity to her terrified attendant, that he should take some measures
to relieve the girl from her distressing situation. The deceased,
he understood, had expressed a desire to be buried in a solitary
churchyard, near the little inn of the Tod's Hole, called the Hermitage,
or more commonly Armitage, in which lay interred some of the Ravenswood
family, and many of their followers. Ravenswood conceived it his duty
to gratify this predilection, commonly found to exist among the Scottish
peasantry, and despatched Babie to the neighbouring village to procure
the assistance of some females, assuring her that, in the mean while, he
would himself remain with the dead body, which, as in Thessaly of old,
it is accounted highly unfit to leave without a watch.

Thus, in the course of a quarter of an hour or little more, he found
himself sitting a solitary guard over the inanimate corpse of her whose
dismissed spirit, unless his eyes had strangely deceived him, had so
recently manifested itself before him. Notwithstanding his natural
courage, the Master was considerably affected by a concurrence of
circumstances so extraordinary. "She died expressing her eager desire
to see me. Can it be, then," was his natural course of reflection--"can
strong and earnest wishes, formed during the last agony of nature,
survive its catastrophe, surmount the awful bounds of the spiritual
world, and place before us its inhabitants in the hues and colouring of
life? And why was that manifested to the eye which could not unfold its
tale to the ear? and wherefore should a breach be made in the laws
of nature, yet its purpose remain unknown? Vain questions, which only
death, when it shall make me like the pale and withered form before me,
can ever resolve."

He laid a cloth, as he spoke, over the lifeless face, upon whose
features he felt unwilling any longer to dwell. He then took his place
in an old carved oaken chair, ornamented with his own armorial bearings,
which Alice had contrived to appropriate to her own use in the pillage
which took place among creditors, officers, domestics, and messengers of
the law when his father left Ravenswood Castle for the last time. Thus
seated, he banished, as much as he could, the superstitious feelings
which the late incident naturally inspired. His own were sad enough,
without the exaggeration of supernatural terror, since he found himself
transferred from the situation of a successful lover of Lucy Ashton, and
an honoured and respected friend of her father, into the melancholy
and solitary guardian of the abandoned and forsaken corpse of a common
pauper.

He was relieved, however, from his sad office sooner that he could
reasonably have expected, considering the distance betwixt the hut of
the deceased and the village, and the age and infirmities of three old
women who came from thence, in military phrase, to relieve guard upon
the body of the defunct. On any other occasion the speed of these
reverend sibyls would have been much more moderate, for the first was
eighty years of age and upwards, the second was paralytic, and the third
lame of a leg from some accident. But the burial duties rendered to the
deceased are, to the Scottish peasant of either sex, a labour of love.
I know not whether it is from the temper of the people, grave and
enthusiastic as it certainly is, or from the recollection of the ancient
Catholic opinions, when the funeral rites were always considered as a
period of festival to the living; but feasting, good cheer, and even
inebriety, were, and are, the frequent accompaniments of a Scottish
old-fashioned burial. What the funeral feast, or "dirgie," as it is
called, was to the men, the gloomy preparations of the dead body for the
coffin were to the women. To straight the contorted limbs upon a board
used for that melancholy purpose, to array the corpse in clean linen,
and over that in its woollen shroad, were operations committed always to
the old matrons of the village, and in which they found a singular and
gloomy delight.

The old women paid the Master their salutations with a ghastly smile,
which reminded him of the meeting betwixt Macbeth and the witches on
the blasted heath of Forres. He gave them some money, and recommended to
them the charge of the dead body of their contemporary, an office which
they willingly undertook; intimating to him at the same time that
he must leave the hut, in order that they might begin their mournful
duties. Ravenswood readily agreed to depart, only tarrying to recommend
to them due attention to the body, and to receive information where
he was to find the sexton, or beadle, who had in charge the deserted
churchyard of the Armitage, in order to prepare matters for the
reception of Old Alice in the place of repose which she had selected for
herself.

"Ye'll no be pinched to find out Johnie Mortsheugh," said the elder
sibyl, and still her withered cheek bore a grisly smile; "he dwells near
the Tod's Hole, an house of entertainment where there has been mony a
blythe birling, for death and drink-draining are near neighbours to ane
anither."

"Ay! and that's e'en true, cummer," said the lame hag, propping herself
with a crutch which supported the shortness of her left leg, "for I mind
when the father of this Master of Ravenswood that is now standing before
us sticked young Blackhall with his whinger, for a wrang word said ower
their wine, or brandy, or what not: he gaed in as light as a lark, and
he came out wi' his feet foremost. I was at the winding of the corpse;
and when the bluid was washed off, he was a bonny bouk of man's body."
It may be easily believed that this ill-timed anecdote hastened the
Master's purpose of quitting a company so evil-omened and so odious.
Yet, while walking to the tree to which his horse was tied, and busying
himself with adjusting the girths of the saddle, he could not avoid
hearing, through the hedge of the little garden, a conversation
respecting himself, betwixt the lame woman and the octogenarian sibyl.
The pair had hobbled into the garden to gather rosemary, southernwood,
rue, and other plants proper to be strewed upon the body, and burned by
way of fumigation in the chimney of the cottage. The paralytic wretch,
almost exhausted by the journey, was left guard upon the corpse, lest
witches or fiends might play their sport with it.

The following law, croaking dialogue was necessarily overheard by the
Master of Ravenswood:

"That's a fresh and full-grown hemlock, Annie Winnie; mony a cummer lang
syne wad hae sought nae better horse to flee over hill and how, through
mist and moonlight, and light down in the King of France's cellar."

"Ay, cummer! but the very deil has turned as hard-hearted now as the
Lord Keeper and the grit folk, that hae breasts like whinstane. They
prick us and they pine us, and they pit us on the pinnywinkles for
witches; and, if I say my prayers backwards ten times ower, Satan will
never gie me amends o' them."

"Did ye ever see the foul thief?" asked her neighbour.

"Na!" replied the other spokeswoman; "but I trow I hae dreamed of him
mony a time, and I think the day will come they will burn me for't. But
ne'er mind, cummer! we hae this dollar of the Master's, and we'll send
doun for bread and for yill, and tobacco, and a drap brandy to burn, and
a wee pickle saft sugar; and be there deil, or nae deil, lass, we'll hae
a merry night o't."

Here her leathern chops uttered a sort of cackling, ghastly laugh,
resembling, to a certain degree, the cry of the screech-owl.

"He's a frank man, and a free-handed man, the Master," said Annie
Winnie, "and a comely personage--broad in the shouthers, and narrow
around the lunyies. He wad mak a bonny corpse; I wad like to hae the
streiking and winding o' him."

"It is written on his brow, Annie Winnie," returned the octogenarian,
her companion, "that hand of woman, or of man either, will never
straught him: dead-deal will never be laid on his back, make you your
market of that, for I hae it frae a sure hand."

"Will it be his lot to die on the battle-ground then, Ailsie Gourlay?
Will he die by the sword or the ball, as his forbears had dune before
him, mony ane o' them?" "Ask nae mair questions about it--he'll no be
graced sae far," replied the sage.

"I ken ye are wiser than ither folk, Aislie Gourlay. But wha tell'd ye
this?" "Fashna your thumb about that, Annie Winnie," answered the sibyl,
"I hae it frae a hand sure eneugh."

"But ye said ye never saw the foul thief," reiterated her inquisitive
companion.

"I hae it frae as sure a hand," said Ailsie, "and frae them that spaed
his fortune before the sark gaed ower his head."

"Hark! I hear his horse's feet riding aff," said the other; "they dinna
sound as if good luck was wi' them."

"Mak haste, sirs," cried the paralytic hag from the cottage, "and let
us do what is needfu', and say what is fitting; for, if the dead corpse
binna straughted, it will girn and thraw, and that will fear the best o'
us."

Ravenswood was now out of hearing. He despised most of the ordinary
prejudices about witchcraft, omens, and vaticination, to which his age
and country still gave such implicit credit that to express a doubt of
them was accounted a crime equal to the unbelief of Jews or Saracens; he
knew also that the prevailing belief, concerning witches, operating
upon the hypochondriac habits of those whom age, infirmity, and poverty
rendered liable to suspicion, and enforced by the fear of death and the
pangs of the most cruel tortures, often extorted those confessions which
encumber and disgrace the criminal records of Scotland during the 17th
century. But the vision of that morning, whether real or imaginary,
had impressed his mind with a superstitious feeling which he in vain
endeavoured to shake off. The nature of the business which awaited him
at the little inn, called Tod's Hole, where he soon after arrived, was
not of a kind to restore his spirits.

It was necessary he should see Mortsheugh, the sexton of the old
burial-ground at Armitage, to arrange matters for the funeral of Alice;
and, as the man dwelt near the place of her late residence, the Master,
after a slight refreshment, walked towards the place where the body of
Alice was to be deposited. It was situated in the nook formed by the
eddying sweep of a stream, which issued from the adjoining hills. A rude
cavern in an adjacent rock, which, in the interior, was cut into the
shape of a cross, formed the hermitage, where some Saxon saint had in
ancient times done penance, and given name to the place. The rich
Abbey of Coldinghame had, in latter days, established a chapel in
the neighbourhood, of which no vestige was now visible, though the
churchyard which surrounded it was still, as upon the present occasion,
used for the interment of particular persons. One or two shattered
yew-trees still grew within the precincts of that which had once been
holy ground. Warriors and barons had been buried there of old, but
their names were forgotten, and their monuments demolished. The only
sepulchral memorials which remained were the upright headstones which
mark the graves of persons of inferior rank. The abode of the sexton was
a solitary cottage adjacent to the ruined wall of the cemetery, but so
low that, with its thatch, which nearly reached the ground, covered with
a thick crop of grass, fog, and house-leeks, it resembled an overgrown
grave. On inquiry, however, Ravenswood found that the man of the last
mattock was absent at a bridal, being fiddler as well as grave-digger to
the vicinity. He therefore retired to the little inn, leaving a message
that early next morning he would again call for the person whose double
occupation connected him at once with the house of mourning and the
house of feasting.

An outrider of the Marquis arrived at Tod's Hole shortly after, with a
message, intimating that his master would join Ravenswood at that place
on the following morning; and the Master, who would otherwise have
proceeded to his old retreat at Wolf's Crag, remained there accordingly
to give meeting to his noble kinsman.




CHAPTER XXIV.

     Hamlet: Has this fellow no feeling of his business? he sings
     at grave making.
     Horatio:   Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.
     Hamlet: 'Tis e'en so: the hand of little employment hath the
     daintier sense.

     Hamlet, Act V. Scene 1.

THE sleep of Ravenswood was broken by ghastly and agitating visions, and
his waking intervals disturbed by melancholy reflections on the past and
painful anticipations of the future. He was perhaps the only traveller
who ever slept in that miserable kennel without complaining of his
lodgings, or feeling inconvenience from their deficiencies. It is when
"the mind is free the body's delicate." Morning, however, found the
Master an early riser, in hopes that the fresh air of the dawn might
afford the refreshment which night had refused him. He took his way
towards the solitary burial-ground, which lay about half a mile from the
inn.

The thin blue smoke, which already began to curl upward, and to
distinguish the cottage of the living from the habitation of the dead,
apprised him that its inmate had returned and was stirring. Accordingly,
on entering the little churchyard, he saw the old man labouring in a
half-made grave. "My destiny," thought Ravenswood, "seems to lead me to
scenes of fate and of death; but these are childish thoughts, and they
shall not master me. I will not again suffer my imagination to beguile
my senses." The old man rested on his spade as the Master approached
him, as if to receive his commands; and as he did not immediately speak,
the sexton opened the discourse in his own way.

"Ye will be a wedding customer, sir, I'se warrant?"

"What makes you think so, friend?" replied the Master.

"I live by twa trades, sir," replied the blythe old man--"fiddle, sir,
and spade; filling the world, and emptying of it; and I suld ken baith
cast of customers by head-mark in thirty years' practice."

"You are mistaken, however, this morning," replied Ravenswood.

"Am I?" said the old man, looking keenly at him, "troth and it may be;
since, for as brent as your brow is, there is something sitting upon it
this day that is as near akin to death as to wedlock. Weel--weel; the
pick and shovel are as ready to your order as bow and fiddle."

"I wish you," said Ravenswood, "to look after the decent interment
of an old woman, Alice Gray, who lived at the Graigfoot in Ravenswood
Park."

"Alice Gray!--blind Alice!" said the sexton; "and is she gane at last?
that's another jow of the bell to bid me be ready. I mind when Habbie
Gray brought her down to this land; a likely lass she was then,
and looked ower her southland nose at us a'. I trow her pride got a
downcome. And is she e'en gane?"

"She died yesterday," said Ravenswood; "and desired to be buried here
beside her husband; you know where he lies, no doubt?"

"Ken where he lies!" answered the sexton, with national indirection of
response. "I ken whar a'body lies, that lies here. But ye were speaking
o' her grave? Lord help us, it's no an ordinar grave that will haud her
in, if a's true that folk said of Alice in her auld days; and if I gae
to six feet deep--and a warlock's grave shouldna be an inch mair ebb,
or her ain witch cummers would soon whirl her out of her shroud for a'
their auld acquaintance--and be't six feet, or be't three, wha's to pay
the making o't, I pray ye?"

"I will pay that, my friend, and all other reasonable charges."

"Reasonable charges!" said the sexton; "ou, there's grundmail--and
bell-siller, though the bell's broken, nae doubt--and the kist--and my
day's wark--and my bit fee--and some brandy and yill to the dirgie, I am
no thinking that you can inter her, to ca' decently, under saxteen pund
Scots."

"There is the money, my friend," said Ravenswood, "and something over.
Be sure you know the grave."

"Ye'll be ane o' her English relations, I'se warrant," said the hoary
man of skulls; "I hae heard she married far below her station. It was
very right to let her bite on the bridle when she was living, and it's
very right to gie her a decent burial now she's dead, for that's a
matter o' credit to yoursell rather than to her. Folk may let their
kindred shift for themsells when they are alive, and can bear the burden
of their ain misdoings; but it's an unnatural thing to let them be
buried like dogs, when a' the discredit gangs to the kindred. What kens
the dead corpse about it?"

"You would not have people neglect their relations on a bridal occasion
neither?" said Ravenswood, who was amused with the professional
limitation of the grave-digger's philanthropy.

The old man cast up his sharp grey eyes with a shrewd smile, as if he
understood the jest, but instantly continued, with his former gravity:
"Bridals--wha wad neglect bridals that had ony regard for plenishing
the earth? To be sure, they suld be celebrated with all manner of good
cheer, and meeting of friends, and musical instruments--harp,
sackbut, and psaltery; or gude fiddle and pipes, when these auld-warld
instruments of melody are hard to be compassed."

"The presence of the fiddle, I dare say," replied Ravenswood, "would
atone for the absence of all the others."

The sexton again looked sharply up at him, as he answered. "Nae
doubt--nae doubt, if it were weel played; but yonder," he said, as if
to change the discourse, "is Halbert Gray's lang hame, that ye were
speering after, just the third bourock beyond the muckle through-stane
that stands on sax legs yonder, abune some ane of the Ravenswoods; for
there is mony of their kin and followers here, deil lift them! though it
isna just their main burial-place."

"They are no favourites, then, of yours, these Ravenswoods?" said the
Master, no much pleased with the passing benediction which was thus
bestowed on his family and name.

"I kenna wha should favour them," said the grave-digger; "when they
had lands and power, they were ill guides of them baith, and now their
head's down, there's few care how lang they may be of lifting it again."

"Indeed!" said Ravenswood; "I never heard that this unhappy family
deserved ill-will at the hands of their country. I grant their poverty,
if that renders them contemptible."

"It will gang a far way till't" said the sexton of Hermitage, "ye may
tak my word for that; at least, I ken naething else that suld mak myself
contemptible, and folk are far frae respecting me as they wad do if I
lived in a twa-lofted sclated house. But as for the Ravenswoods, I hae
seen three generations of them, and deil ane to mend other."

"I thought they had enjoyed a fair character in the country," said their
descendant.

"Character! Ou, ye see, sir," said the sexton, "as for the auld gudesire
body of a lord, I lived on his land when I was a swanking young chield,
and could hae blawn the trumpet wi' ony body, for I had wind eneugh
then; and touching this trumpeter Marine that I have heard play afore
the lords of the circuit, I wad hae made nae mair o' him than of a bairn
and a bawbee whistle. I defy him to hae played 'Boot and saddle,'
or 'Horse and away,' or 'Gallants, come trot,' with me; he hadna the
tones."

"But what is all this to old Lord Ravenswood, my friend?" said the
Master, who, with an anxiety not unnatural in his circumstances, was
desirous of prosecuting the musician's first topic--"what had his memory
to do with the degeneracy of the trumpet music?"

"Just this, sir," answered the sexton, "that I lost my wind in his
service. Ye see I was trumpeter at the castle, and had allowance for
blawing at break of day, and at dinner time, and other whiles when
there was company about, and it pleased my lord; and when he raised his
militia to caper awa' to Bothwell Brig against the wrang-headed westland
Whigs, I behoved, reason or name, to munt a horse and caper awa' wi'
them."

"And very reasonable," said Ravenswood; "you were his servant and
vassal."

"Servitor, say ye?" replied the sexton, "and so I was; but it was to
blaw folk to their warm dinner, or at the warst to a decent kirkyard,
and no to skirl them awa' to a bluidy braeside, where there was deil a
bedral but the hooded craw. But bide ye, ye shall hear what cam o't, and
how far I am bund to be bedesman to the Ravenswoods. Till't, ye see, we
gaed on a braw simmer morning, twenty-fourth of June, saxteen hundred
and se'enty-nine, of a' the days of the month and year--drums beat, guns
rattled, horses kicked and trampled. Hackstoun of Rathillet keepit the
brig wi' mustket and carabine and pike, sword and scythe for what I ken,
and we horsemen were ordered down to cross at the ford,--I hate fords
at a' times, let abee when there's thousands of armed men on the other
side. There was auld Ravenswood brandishing his Andrew Ferrara at the
head, and crying to us to come and buckle to, as if we had been gaun to
a fair; there was Caleb Balderstone, that is living yet, flourishing in
the rear, and swearing Gog and Magog, he would put steel through the guts
of ony man that turned bridle; there was young Allan Ravenswood, that
was then Master, wi' a bended pistol in his hand--it was a mercy it gaed
na aff!--crying to me, that had scarce as much wind left as serve the
necessary purpose of my ain lungs, 'Sound, you poltroon!--sound, you
damned cowardly villain, or I will blow your brains out!' and, to be
sure, I blew sic points of war that the scraugh of a clockin-hen was
music to them."

"Well, sir, cut all this short," said Ravenswood.

"Short! I had like to hae been cut short mysell, in the flower of my
youth, as Scripture says; and that's the very thing that I compleen o'.
Weel! in to the water we behoved a' to splash, heels ower head, sit or
fa'--ae horse driving on anither, as is the way of brute beasts, and
riders that hae as little sense; the very bushes on the ither side were
a-bleeze wi' the flashes of the Whig guns; and my horse had just taen the
grund, when a blackavised westland carle--I wad mind the face o' him a
hundred years yet--an ee like a wild falcon's, and a beard as broad
as my shovel--clapped the end o' his lang black gun within a quarter's
length of my lug! By the grace o' Mercy, the horse swarved round, and I
fell aff at the tae side as the ball whistled by at the tither, and the
fell auld lord took the Whig such a swauk wi' his broadsword that he
made twa pieces o' his head, and down fell the lurdance wi' a' his bouk
abune me."

"You were rather obliged to the old lord, I think," said Ravenswood.

"Was I? my sartie! first for bringing me into jeopardy, would I nould I,
and then for whomling a chield on the tap o' me that dang the very wind
out of my body? I hae been short-breathed ever since, and canna gang
twenty yards without peghing like a miller's aiver."

"You lost, then, your place as trumpeter?" said Ravenswood.

"Lost it! to be sure I lost it," replied the sexton, "for I couldna hae
played pew upon a dry hemlock; but I might hae dune weel eneugh, for
I keepit the wage and the free house, and little to do but play on the
fiddle to them, but for Allan, last Lord Ravenswood, that was far waur
than ever his father was."

"What," said the Master, "did my father--I mean, did his father's
son--this last Lord Ravenswood, deprive you of what the bounty of his
father allowed you?"

"Ay, troth did he," answered the old man; "for he loot his affairs gang
to the dogs, and let in this Sir William Ashton on us, that will gie
naething for naething, and just removed me and a' the puir creatures
that had bite and soup at the castle, and a hole to put our heads in,
when things were in the auld way."

"If Lord Ravenswood protected his people, my friend, while he had the
means of doing so, I think they might spare his memory," replied the
Master.

"Ye are welcome to your ain opinion, sir," said the sexton; "but ye
winna persuade me that he did his duty, either to himsell or to huz puir
dependent creatures, in guiding us the gate he has done; he might hae
gien us life-rent tacks of our bits o' houses and yards; and me, that's
an auld man, living in yon miserable cabin, that's fitter for the dead
than the quick, and killed wi' rheumatise, and John Smith in my dainty
bit mailing, and his window glazen, and a' because Ravenswood guided his
gear like a fule!"

"It is but too true," said Ravenswood, conscience-struck; "the penalties
of extravagance extend far beyond the prodigal's own sufferings."
"However," said the sexton, "this young man Edgar is like to avenge my
wrangs on the haill of his kindred." "Indeed?" said Ravenswood; "why
should you suppose so?"

"They say he is about to marry the daughter of Leddy Ashton; and let her
leddyship get his head ance under her oxter, and see you if she winna
gie his neck a thraw. Sorra a bit, if I were him! Let her alane for
hauding a'thing in het water that draws near her. Sae the warst wish I
shall wish the lad is, that he may take his ain creditable gate o't, and
ally himsell wi' his father's enemies, that have taken his broad lands
and my bonny kail-yard from the lawful owners thereof."

Cervantes acutely remarks, that flattery is pleasing even from the mouth
of a madman; and censure, as well as praise, often affects us, while we
despise the opinions and motives on which it is founded and expressed.
Ravenswood, abruptly reiterating his command that Alice's funeral should
be attended to, flung away from the sexton, under the painful impression
that the great as well as the small vulgar would think of his engagement
with Lucy like this ignorant and selfish peasant.

"And I have stooped to subject myself to these calumnies, and am
rejected notwithstanding! Lucy, your faith must be true and perfect as
the diamond to compensate for the dishonour which men's opinions, and
the conduct of your mother, attach to the heir of Ravenswood!"

As he raised his eyes, he beheld the Marquis of A----, who, having
arrived at the Tod's Hole, had walked forth to look for his kinsman.

After mutual greetings, he made some apology to the Master for not
coming forward on the preceding evening. "It was his wish," he said,
"to have done so, but he had come to the knowledge of some matters which
induced him to delay his purpose. I find," he proceeded, "there has been
a love affair here, kinsman; and though I might blame you for not
having communicated with me, as being in some degree the chief of your
family----"

"With your lordship's permission," said Ravenswood, "I am deeply
grateful for the interest you are pleased to take in me, but _I_ am the
chief and head of my family."

"I know it--I know it," said the Marquis; "in a strict heraldic and
genealogical sense, you certainly are so; what I mean is, that being in
some measure under my guardianship----"

"I must take the liberty to say, my lord----" answered Ravenswood, and
the tone in which he interrupted the Marquis boded no long duration to
the friendship of the noble relatives, when he himself was interrupted
by the little sexton, who cam puffing after them, to ask if their
honours would choose music at the change-house to make up for short
cheer.

"We want no music," said the Master, abruptly.

"Your honour disna ken what ye're refusing, then," said the fiddler,
with the impertinent freedom of his profession. "I can play, 'Wilt thou
do't again,' and 'The Auld Man's Mear's Dead,' sax times better than
ever Patie Birnie. I'll get my fiddle in the turning of a coffin-screw."

"Take yourself away, sir," said the Marquis.

"And if your honour be a north-country gentleman," said the persevering
minstrel, "whilk I wad judge from your tongue, I can play 'Liggeram
Cosh,' and 'Mullin Dhu,' and 'The Cummers of Athole.'"

"Take yourself away, friend; you interrupt our conversation."

"Or if, under your honour's favour, ye should happen to be a
thought honest, I can play (this in a low and confidential tone)
'Killiecrankie,' and 'The King shall hae his ain,' and 'The Auld Stuarts
back again'; and the wife at the change-house is a decent, discreet
body, neither kens nor cares what toasts are drucken, and what tunes
are played, in her house: she's deaf to a'thing but the clink o' the
siller."

The Marquis, who was sometimes suspected of Jacobitism, could not help
laughing as he threw the fellow a dollar, and bid him go play to the
servants if he had a mind, and leave them at peace.

"Aweel, gentlemen," said he, "I am wishing your honours gude day. I'll
be a' the better of the dollar, and ye'll be the waur of wanting music,
I'se tell ye. But I'se gang hame, and finish the grave in the tuning o'
a fiddle-string, lay by my spade, and then get my tother bread-winner,
and awa' to your folk, and see if they hae better lugs than their
masters."




CHAPTER XXV.

     True love, an thou be true,
     Thou has ane kittle part to play;
     For fortune, fashion, fancy, and thou,
     Maun strive for many a day.

     I've kend by mony a friend's tale,
     Far better by this heart of mine,
     What time and change of fancy avail
     A true-love knot to untwine.

     HENDERSOUN.

"I WISHED to tell you, my good kinsman," said the Marquis, "now that we
are quit of that impertinent fiddler, that I had tried to discuss this
love affair of yours with Sir William Ashton's daughter. I never saw
the young lady but for a few minutes to-day; so, being a stranger to her
personal merits, I pay a compliment to you, and offer her no offence, in
saying you might do better."

"My lord, I am much indebted for the interest you have taken in my
affairs," said Ravenswood. "I did not intend to have troubled you in any
matter concerning Miss Ashton. As my engagement with that young lady has
reached your lordship, I can only say, that you must necessarily suppose
that I was aware of the objections to my marrying into her father's
family, and of course must have been completely satisfied with the
reasons by which these objections are overbalanced, since I have
proceeded so far in the matter."

"Nay, Master, if you had heard me out," said his noble relation, "you
might have spared that observation; for, without questioning that you
had reasons which seemed to you to counterbalance every other obstacle,
I set myself, by every means that it became me to use towards the
Ashtons, to persuade them to meet your views."

"I am obliged to your lordship for your unsolicited intercession," said
Ravenswood; "especially as I am sure your lordship would never carry it
beyond the bounds which it became me to use."

"Of that," said the Marquis, "you may be confident; I myself felt the
delicacy of the matter too much to place a gentleman nearly connected
with my house in a degrading or dubious situation with these Ashtons.
But I pointed out all the advantages of their marrying their daughter
into a house so honourable, and so nearly related with the first of
Scotland; I explained the exact degree of relationship in which the
Ravenswoods stand to ourselves; and I even hinted how political matters
were like to turn, and what cards would be trumps next Parliament. I
said I regarded you as a son--or a nephew, or so--rather than as a more
distant relation; and that I made your affair entirely my own."

"And what was the issue of your lordship's explanation?" said
Ravenswood, in some doubt whether he should resent or express gratitude
for his interference.

"Why, the Lord Keeper would have listened to reason," said the Marquis;
"he is rather unwilling to leave his place, which, in the present view
of a change, must be vacated; and, to say truth, he seemed to have
a liking for you, and to be sensible of the general advantages to be
attained by such a match. But his lady, who is tongue of the trump,
Master----"

"What of Lady Ashton, my lord?" said Ravenswood; "let me know the issue
of this extraordinary conference: I can bear it."

"I am glad of that, kinsman," said the Marquis, "for I am ashamed to
tell you half what she said. It is enough--her mind is made up, and the
mistress of a first-rate boarding-school could not have rejected
with more haughty indifference the suit of a half-pay Irish officer,
beseeching permission to wait upon the heiress of a West India planter,
than Lady Ashton spurned every proposal of mediation which it could at
all become me to offer in behalf of you, my good kinsman. I cannot guess
what she means. A more honourable connexion she could not form, that's
certain. As for money and land, that used to be her husband's business
rather than hers; I really think she hates you for having the rank
which her husband has not, and perhaps for not having the lands that her
goodman has. But I should only vex you to say more about it--here we are
at the change-house."

The Master of Ravenswood paused as he entered the cottage, which reeked
through all its crevices, and they were not few, from the exertions of
the Marquis's travelling-cooks to supply good cheer, and spread, as it
were, a table in the wilderness.

"My Lord Marquis," said Ravenswood, "I already mentioned that accident
has put your lordship in possession of a secret which, with my consent,
should have remained one even to you, my kinsman, for some time. Since
the secret was to part from my own custody, and that of the only person
besides who was interested in it, I am not sorry it should have reached
your lordship's ears, as being fully aware that you are my noble kinsman
and friend."

"You may believe it is safely lodged with me, Master of Ravenswood,"
said the Marquis; "but I should like well to hear you say that you
renounced the idea of an alliance which you can hardly pursue without a
certain degree of degradation."

"Of that, my lord, I shall judge," answered Ravenswood, "and I hope with
delicacy as sensitive as any of my friends. But I have no engagement
with Sir William and Lady Ashton. It is with Miss Ashton alone that I
have entered upon the subject, and my conduct in the matter shall be
entirely ruled by hers. If she continues to prefer me in my poverty to
the wealthier suitors whom her friends recommend, I may well make some
sacrifice to her sincere affection: I may well surrender to her the
less tangible and less palpable advantages of birth, and the deep-rooted
prejudices of family hatred. If Miss Lucy Ashton should change her mind
on a subject of such delicacy, I trust my friends will be silent on my
disappointment, and I shall know how to make my enemies so."

"Spoke like a gallant young nobleman," said the Marquis; "for my part, I
have that regard for you, that I should be sorry the thing went on. This
Sir William Ashton was a pretty enough pettifogging kind of a lawyer
twenty years ago, and betwixt battling at the bar and leading in
committees of Parliament he has got well on; the Darien matter lent him
a lift, for he had good intelligence and sound views, and sold out in
time; but the best work is had out of him. No government will take him
at his own, or rather his wife's extravagant, valuation; and betwixt his
indecision and her insolence, from all I can guess, he will outsit his
market, and be had cheap when no one will bid for him. I say nothing
of Miss Ashton; but I assure you, a connexion with her father will be
neither useful nor ornamental, beyond that part of your father's spoils
which he may be prevailed upon to disgorge by way of tocher-good; and
take my word for it, you will get more if you have spirit to bell the
cat with him in the House of Peers. And I will be the man, cousin,"
continued his lordship, "will course the fox for you, and make him rue
the day that ever he refused a composition too honourable for him, and
proposed by me on the behalf of a kinsman."

There was something in all this that, as it were, overshot the mark.
Ravenswood could not disguise from himself that his noble kinsman
had more reasons for taking offence at the reception of his suit than
regarded his interest and honour, yet he could neither complain nor be
surprised that it should be so. He contented himself, therefore, with
repeating, that his attachment was to Miss Ashton personally; that he
desired neither wealth nor aggrandisement from her father's means and
influence; and that nothing should prevent his keeping his engagement,
excepting her own express desire that it should be relinquished; and he
requested as a favour that the matter might be no more mentioned betwixt
them at present, assuring the Marquis of A----that he should be his
confidant or its interruption.

The Marquis soon had more agreeable, as well as more interesting,
subjects on which to converse. A foot-post, who had followed him from
Edinburgh to Ravenswood Castle, and had traced his steps to the
Tod's Hole, brought him a packet laden with good news. The political
calculations of the Marquis had proved just, both in London and at
Edinburgh, and he saw almost within his grasp the pre-eminence for which
he had panted. The refreshments which the servants had prepared were now
put on the table, and an epicure would perhaps have enjoyed them with
additional zest from the contrast which such fare afforded to the
miserable cabin in which it was served up.

The turn of conversation corresponded with and added to the social
feelings of the company. The Marquis expanded with pleasure on the power
which probably incidents were likely to assign to him, and on the
use which eh hoped to make of it in serving his kinsman Ravenswood.
Ravenswood could but repeat the gratitude which he really felt, even
when he considered the topic as too long dwelt upon. The wine was
excellent, notwithstanding its having been brought in a runlet from
Edinburgh; and the habits of the Marquis, when engaged with such good
cheer, were somewhat sedentary. And so it fell out that they delayed
their journey two hours later than was their original purpose.

"But what of that, my good young friend?" said the Marquis. "Your Castle
of Wolf's Crag is at but five or six miles' distance, and will afford
the same hospitality to your kinsman of A----that it gave to this same
Sir William Ashton."

"Sir William took the castle by storm," said Ravenswood, "and, like many
a victor, had little reason to congratulate himself on his conquest."
"Well--well!" said Lord A----, whose dignity was something relaxed by
the wine he had drunk, "I see I must bribe you to harbour me. Come,
pledge me in a bumper health to the last young lady that slept at Wolf's
Crag, and liked her quarters. My bones are not so tender as hers, and I
am resolved to occupy her apartment to-night, that I may judge how hard
the couch is that love can soften."

"Your lordship may choose what penance you please," said Ravenswood;
"but I assure you, I should expect my old servant to hang himself, or
throw himself from the battlements, should your lordship visit him so
unexpectedly. I do assure you, we are totally and literally unprovided."

But his declaration only brought from his noble patron an assurance of
his own total indifference as to every species of accommodation, and his
determination to see the Tower of Wolf's Crag. His ancestor, he
said, had been feasted there, when he went forward with the then Lord
Ravenswood to the fatal battle of Flodden, in which they both fell. Thus
hard pressed, the Master offered to ride forward to get matters put in
such preparation as time and circumstances admitted; but the Marquis
protested his kinsman must afford him his company, and would only
consent that an avant-courier should carry to the desinted seneschal,
Caleb Balderstone, the unexpected news of this invasion.

The Master of Ravenswood soon after accompanied the Marquis in his
carriage, as the latter had proposed; and when they became better
acquainted in the progress of the journey, his noble relation explained
the very liberal views which he entertained for his relation's
preferment, in case of the success of his own political schemes. They
related to a secret and highly important commission beyond sea, which
could only be entrusted to a person of rank, talent, and perfect
confidence, and which, as it required great trust and reliance on the
envoy employed, could but not prove both honourable and advantageous to
him. We need not enter into the nature and purpose of this commission,
farther than to acquaint our readers that the charge was in prospect
highly acceptable to the Master of Ravenswood, who hailed with pleasure
the hope of emerging from his present state of indigence and inaction
into independence and honourable exertion.

While he listened thus eagerly to the details with which the Marquis
now thought it necessary to entrust him, the messenger who had been
despatched to the Tower of Wolf's Crag returned with Caleb Balderstone's
humble duty, and an assurance that "a' should be in seemly order, sic as
the hurry of time permitted, to receive their lordships as it behoved."

Ravenswood was too well accustomed to his seneschal's mode of acting and
speaking to hope much from this confident assurance. He knew that Caleb
acted upon the principle of the Spanish generals, in the campaign
of ----, who, much to the perplexity of the Prince of Orange, their
commander-in-chief, used to report their troops as full in number,
and possessed of all necessary points of equipment, not considering it
consistent with their dignity, or the honour of Spain, to confess
any deficiency either in men or munition, until the want of both was
unavoidably discovered in the day of battle. Accordingly, Ravenswood
thought it necessary to give the Marquis some hint that the fair
assurance which they had just received from Caleb did not by any means
ensure them against a very indifferent reception.

"You do yourself injustice, Master," said the Marquis, "or you wish
to surprise me agreeably. From this window I see a great light in the
direction where, if I remember aright, Wolf's Crag lies; and, to judge
from the splendour which the old Tower sheds around it, the preparations
for our reception must be of no ordinary description. I remember your
father putting the same deception on me, when we went to the Tower for
a few days' hawking, about twenty years since, and yet we spent our time
as jollily at Wolf's Crag as we could have done at my own hunting seat
at B----."

"Your lordship, I fear, will experience that the faculty of the
present proprietor to entertain his friends is greatly abridged," said
Ravenswood; "the will, I need hardly say, remains the same. But I am as
much at a loss as your lordship to account for so strong and brilliant a
light as is now above Wolf's Crag; the windows of the Tower are few and
narrow, and those of the lower story are hidden from us by the walls of
the court. I cannot conceive that any illumination of an ordinary nature
could afford such a blaze of light."

The mystery was soon explained; for the cavalcade almost instantly
halted, and the voice of Caleb Balderstone was heard at the coach
window, exclaiming, in accents broken by grief and fear, "Och,
gentlemen! Och, my gude lords! Och, haud to the right! Wolf's Crag is
burning, bower and ha'--a' the rich plenishing outside and inside--a'
the fine graith, pictures, tapestries, needle-wark, hangings, and other
decorements--a' in a bleeze, as if they were nae mair than sae mony
peats, or as muckle pease-strae! Haud to the right, gentlemen, I implore
ye; there is some sma' provision making at Luckie Sma'trash's; but oh,
wae for this night, and wae for me that lives to see it!"

Ravenswood was first stunned by this new and unexpected calamity; but
after a moment's recollection he sprang from the carriage, and hastily
bidding his noble kinsman good-night, was about to ascend the hill
towards the castle, the broad and full conflagration of which now flung
forth a high column of red light, that flickered far to seaward upon the
dashing waves of the ocean.

"Take a horse, Master," exclaimed the Marquis, greatly affected by this
additional misfortune, so unexpectedly heaped upon his young protege;
"and give me my ambling palfrey; and haste forward, you knaves, to see
what can be done to save the furniture, or to extinguish the fire--ride,
you knaves, for your lives!"

The attendants bustled together, and began to strike their horses with
the spur, and call upon Caleb to show them the road. But the voice
of that careful seneschal was heard above the tumult, "Oh, stop sirs,
stop--turn bridle, for the luve of Mercy; add not loss of lives to the
loss of warld's gean! Thirty barrels of powther, landed out of a Dunkirk
dogger in the auld lord's time--a' in the vau'ts of the auld tower,--the
fire canna be far off it, I trow. Lord's sake, to the right, lads--to
the right; let's pit the hill atween us and peril,--a wap wi' a
corner-stane o' Wolf's Crag wad defy the doctor!"

It will readily be supposed that this annunciation hurried the Marquis
and his attendants into the route which Caleb prescribed, dragging
Ravenswood along with them, although there was much in the matter which
he could not possibly comprehend. "Gunpowder!" he exclaimed, laying hold
of Caleb, who in vain endeavoured to escape from him; "what gunpowder?
How any quantity of powder could be in Wolf's Crag without my knowledge,
I cannot possibly comprehend."

"But I can," interrupted the Marquis, whispering him, "I can comprehend
it thoroughly; for God's sake, ask him no more questions at present."

"There it is, now," said Caleb, extricating himself from his master, and
adjusting his dress, "your honour will believe his lordship's honourable
testimony. His lordship minds weel how, in the year that him they ca'd
King Willie died----"

"Hush! hush, my good friend!" said the Marquis; "I shall satisfy your
master upon that subject."

"And the people at Wolf's Hope," said Ravenswood, "did none of them come
to your assistance before the flame got so high?"

"Ay did they, mony ane of them, the rapscallions!" said Caleb; "but
truly I was in nae hurry to let them into the Tower, where there were so
much plate and valuables."

"Confound you for an impudent liar!" said Ravenswood, in uncontrollable
ire, "there was not a single ounce of----"

"Forbye," said the butler, most irreverently raising his voice to a
pitch which drowned his master's, "the fire made fast on us, owing to
the store of tapestry and carved timmer in the banqueting-ha', and the
loons ran like scaulded rats sae sune as they heard of the gunpouther."

"I do entreat," said the Marquis to Ravenswood, "you will ask him no
more questions."

"Only one, my lord. What has become of poor Mysie?"

"Mysie!" said Caleb, "I had nae time to look about ony Mysie; she's
in the Tower, I'se warrant, biding her awful doom." "By heaven," said
Ravenswood, "I do not understand all this! The life of a faithful old
creature is at stake; my lord, I will be withheld no longer; I will at
least ride up, and see whether the danger is as imminent as this old
fool pretends."

"Weel, then, as I live by bread," said Caleb, "Mysie is weel and safe.
I saw her out of the castle before I left it mysell. Was I ganging to
forget an auld fellow-servant?"

"What made you tell me the contrary this moment?" said his master.

"Did I tell you the contrary?" said Caleb; "then I maun hae been
dreaming surely, or this awsome night has turned my judgment; but safe
she is, and ne'er a living soul in the castle, a' the better for them:
they wau have gotten an unco heezy."

The Master of Ravenswood, upon this assurance being solemnly reiterated,
and notwithstanding his extreme wish to witness the last explosion,
which was to ruin to the ground the mansion of his fathers, suffered
himself to be dragged onward towards the village of Wolf's Hope, where
not only the change-house, but that of our well-known friend the cooper,
were all prepared for reception of himself and his noble guest, with a
liberality of provision which requires some explanation.

We omitted to mention in its place, that Lockhard having fished out the
truth concerning the mode by which Caleb had obtained the supplies for
his banquet, the Lord Keeper, amused with the incident, and desirous at
the time to gratify Ravenswood, had recommended the cooper of Wolf''s
Hope to the official situation under government the prospect of which
had reconciled him to the loss of his wild-fowl. Mr. Girder's preferment
had occasioned a pleasing surprise to old Caleb; for when, some days
after his master's departure, he found himself absolutely compelled, by
some necessary business, to visit the fishing hamlet, and was gliding
like a ghost past the door of the cooper, for fear of being summoned to
give some account of the progress of the solicitation in his favour, or,
more probably that the inmates might upbraid him with the false hope
he had held out upon the subject, he heard himself, not without some
apprehension, summoned at once in treble, tenor, and bass--a trio
performed by the voices of Mrs. Girder, old Dame Loup-the-Dyke, and the
goodman of the dwelling--"Mr. Caleb!--Mr. Caleb Balderstone! I hope
ye arena ganging dry-lipped by our door, and we sae muckle indebted to
you?"

This might be said ironically as well as in earnest. Caleb augured the
worst, turned a deaf ear to the trio aforesaid, and was moving doggedly
on, his ancient castor pulled over his brows, and his eyes bent on the
ground, as if to count the flinty pebbles with which the rude pathway
was causewayed. But on a sudden he found himself surrounded in his
progress, like a stately merchantman in the Gut of Gibraltar (I hope
the ladies will excuse the tarpaulin phrase) by three Algerine galleys.
"Gude guide us, Mr. Balderstone!" said Mrs. Girder. "Wha wad hae thought
it of an auld and kenn'd friend!" said the mother.

"And no sae muckle as stay to receive our thanks," said the cooper
himself, "and frae the like o' me that seldom offers them! I am sure I
hope there's nae ill seed sawn between us, Mr. Balderstone. Ony man that
has said to ye I am no gratefu' for the situation of Queen's cooper, let
me hae a whample at him wi' mine eatche, that's a'."

"My good friends--my dear friends," said Caleb, still doubting how the
certainty of the matter might stand, "what needs a' this ceremony? Ane
tries to serve their friends, and sometimes they may happen to prosper,
and sometimes to misgie. Naething I care to be fashed wi' less than
thanks; I never could bide them."

"Faith, Mr. Balderstone, ye suld hae been fashed wi' few o' mine," said
the downright man of staves and hoops, "if I had only your gude-will to
thank ye for: I suld e'en hae set the guse, and the wild deukes, adn the
runlet of sack to balance that account. Gude-will, man, is a geizen'd
tub, that hauds in nae liquor; but gude deed's like the cask, tight,
round, and sound, that will haud liquor for the king."

"Have ye no heard of our letter," said the mother-in-law, "making our
John [Gibbie] the Queen's cooper for certain? and scarce a chield that
had ever hammered gird upon tub but was applying for it?"

"Have I heard!!!" said Caleb, who now found how the wind set, with an
accent of exceeding contempt, at the doubt expressed--"have I heard,
quo'she!!!" and as he spoke he changed his shambling, skulking, dodging
pace into a manly and authoritative step, readjusted his cocked hat,
and suffered his brow to emerge from under it in all the pride of
aristocracy, like the sun from behind a cloud.

"To be sure, he canna but hae heard," said the good woman.

"Ay, to be sure it's impossible but I should," said Caleb; "and sae I'll
be the first to kiss ye, joe, and wish you, cooper, much joy of your
preferment, naething doubting but ye ken wha are your friends, and HAVE
helped ye, and CAN help ye. I thought it right to look a wee strange
upon it at first," added Caleb, "just to see if ye were made of the
right mettle; but ye ring true, lad--ye ring true!"

So saying, with a most lordly air he kissed the women, and abandoned
his hand, with an air of serene patronage, to the hearty shake of
Mr. Girder's horn-hard palm. Upon this complete, and to Caleb most
satisfactory, information he did not, it may readily be believed,
hesitate to accept an invitation to a solemn feast, to which were
invited, not only all the NOTABLES of the village, but even his ancient
antagonist, Mr. Dingwall, himself. At this festivity he was, of course,
the most welcome and most honoured guest; and so well did he ply the
company with stories of what he could do with his master, his master
with the Lord Keeper, the Lord Keeper with the council, and the council
with the king [queen], that before the company dismissed (which was,
indeed, rather at an early hour than a late one), every man of note in
the village was ascending to the top-gallant of some ideal preferment by
the ladder of ropes which Caleb had presented to their imagination. Nay,
the cunning butler regained in that moment not only all the influence he
possessed formerly over the villagers, when the baronial family which
he served were at the proudest, but acquired even an accession of
importance. The writer--the very attorney himself, such is the thirst of
preferment--felt the force of the attraction, and taking an opportunity
to draw Caleb into a corner, spoke, with affectionate regret, of the
declining health of the sheriff-clerk of the county.

"An excellent man--a most valuable man, Mr. Caleb; but fat sall I say!
we are peer feckless bodies, here the day and awa' by cock-screech the
morn; and if he failyies, there maun be somebody in his place; and gif
that ye could airt it my way, I sall be thankful, man--a gluve stuffed
wi gowd nobles; an' hark ye, man something canny till yoursell, and the
Wolf's Hope carles to settle kindly wi' the Master of Ravenswood--that
is, Lord Ravenswood--God bless his lordship!"

A smile, and a hearty squeeze by the hand, was the suitable answer to
this overture; and Caleb made his escape from the jovial party, in order
to avoid committing himself by any special promises.

"The Lord be gude to me," said Caleb, when he found himself in the open
air, and at liberty to give vent to the self-exultation with which
he was, as it were, distended; "did ever ony man see sic a set of
green-gaislings? The very pickmaws and solan-geese out-bye yonder at
the Bass hae ten times their sense! God, an I had been the Lord High
Commissioner to the Estates o' Parliament, they couldna hae beflumm'd
me mair; and, to speak Heaven's truth, I could hardly hae beflumm'd them
better neither! But the writer--ha! ha! ha!--ah, ha! ha! ha! mercy on
me, that I suld live in my auld days to gie the ganag-bye to the very
writer! Sheriff-clerk!!! But I hae an auld account to settle wi' the
carle; and to make amends for bye-ganes, the office shall just cost him
as much time-serving and tide-serving as if he were to get it in gude
earnest, of whilk there is sma' appearance, unless the Master learns
mair the ways of this warld, whilk it is muckle to be doubted that he
never will do."




CHAPTER XXVI.

     Why flames yon far summit--why shoot to the blast
     Those embers, like stars from the firmament cast?
     'Tis the fire-shower of ruin, all dreadfully driven
     From thine eyrie, that beacons the darkness of Heaven.

     CAMPBELL.

THE circumstances announced in the conclusion of the last chapter will
account for the ready and cheerful reception of the Marquis of A---- and
the Master of Ravenswood in the village of Wolf's Hope. In fact, Caleb
had no sooner announced the conflagration of the tower than the whole
hamlet were upon foot to hasten to extinguish the flames. And although
that zealous adherent diverted their zeal by intimating the formidable
contents of the subterranean apartments, yet the check only turned their
assiduity into another direction. Never had there been such slaughtering
of capons, and fat geese, and barndoor fowls; never such boiling of
"reested" hams; never such making of car-cakes and sweet scones, Selkirk
bannocks, cookies, and petticoat-tails--delicacies little known to the
present generation. Never had there been such a tapping of barrels, and
such uncorking of greybeards, in the village of Wolf's Hope. All the
inferior houses were thrown open for the reception of the Marquis's
dependants, who came, it was thought, as precursors of the shower of
preferment which hereafter was to leave the rest of Scotland dry,
in order to distil its rich dews on the village of Wolf's Hope under
Lammermoor. The minister put in his claim to have the guests of
distinction lodged at the manse, having his eye, it was thought, upon
a neighbouring preferment, where the incumbent was sickly; but Mr.
Balderstone destined that honour to the cooper, his wife, and wife's
mother, who danced for joy at the preferences thus assigned them.

Many a beck and many a bow welcomed these noble guests to as good
entertainment as persons of such rank could set before such visitors;
and the old dame, who had formerly lived in Ravenswood Castle, and
knew, as she said, the ways of the nobility, was in no whit wanting in
arranging matters, as well as circumstances permitted, according to the
etiquette of the times. The cooper's house was so roomy that each guest
had his separate retiring-room, to which they were ushered with all due
ceremony, while the plentiful supper was in the act of being placed upon
the table.

Ravenswood no sooner found himself alone than, impelled by a thousand
feelings, he left the apartment, the house, and the village, and hastily
retraced his steps to the brow of the hill, which rose betwixt the
village and screened it from the tower, in order to view the final fall
of the house of his fathers. Some idle boys from the hamlet had taken
the same direction out of curiosity, having first witnessed the arrival
of the coach and six and its attendants. As they ran one by one past the
Master, calling to each other to "Come and see the auld tower blaw up in
the lift like the peelings of an ingan," he could not but feel himself
moved with indignation. "And these are the sons of my father's vassals,"
he said--"of men bound, both by law and gratitude, to follow our steps
through battle, and fire, and flood; and now the destruction of their
liege lord's house is but a holiday's sight to them."

These exasperating reflections were partly expresssed in the acrimony
with which he exclaimed, on feeling himself pulled by the cloak: "What
do you want, you dog?"

"I am a dog, and an auld dog too," answered Caleb, for it was he who had
taken the freedom, "and I am like to get a dog's wages; but it does not
signification a pinch of sneesing, for I am ower auld a dog to learn new
tricks, or to follow a new master."

As he spoke, Ravenswood attained the ridge of the hill from which Wolf's
Crag was visible; the flames had entirely sunk down, and, to his great
surprise, there was only a dusky reddening upon the clouds immediately
over the castle, which seemed the reflection of the embers of the sunken
fire.

"The place cannot have blown up," said the Master; "we must have heard
the report: if a quarter of the gunpowder was there you tell me of, it
would have been heard twenty miles off."

"It've very like it wad," said Balderstone, composedly.

"Then the fire cannot have reached the vaults?"

"It's like no," answered Caleb, with the same impenetrable gravity.

"Hark ye, Caleb," said his master, "this grows a little too much for
my patience. I must go and examine how matters stand at Wolf's Crag
myself."

"Your honour is ganging to gang nae sic gate," said Caleb, firmly.

"And why not?" said Ravenswood, sharply; "who or what shall prevent me?"

"Even I mysell," said Caleb, with the same determination.

"You, Balderstone!" replied the Master; "you are forgetting yourself, I
think."

"But I think no," said Balderstone; "for I can just tell ye a' about the
castle on this knowe-head as weel as if ye were at it. Only dinna pit
yoursell into a kippage, and expose yoursell before the weans, or before
the Marquis, when ye gang down-bye."

"Speak out, you old fool," replied his master, "and let me know the best
and the worst at once."

"Ou, the best and the warst is, just that the tower is standing hail and
feir, as safe and as empty as when ye left it."

"Indeed! and the fire?" said Ravenswood. "Not a gleed of fire, then,
except the bit kindling peat, and maybe a spunk in Mysie's cutty-pipe,"
replied Caleb.

"But the flame?" demanded Ravenswood--"the broad blaze which might have
been seen ten miles off--what occasioned that?"

"Hout awa'! it's an auld saying and a true--

     Little's the light Will be seen far in a mirk night.

A wheen fern and horse little that I fired in the courtyard, after
sending back the loon of a footman; and, to speak Heaven's truth, the
next time that ye send or bring ony body here, let them ge gentles
allenarly, without ony fremd servants, like that chield Lockhard, to
be gledging and gleeing about, and looking upon the wrang side of ane's
housekeeping, to the discredit of the family, and forcing ane to damn
their souls wi' telling ae lee after another faster than I can count
them: I wad rather set fire to the tower in gude earnest, and burn it
ower my ain head into the bargain, or I see the family dishonoured in
the sort."

"Upon my word, I am infinitely obliged by the proposal, Caleb," said his
master, scarce able to restrain his laughter, though rather angry at
the same time. "But the gunpowder--is there such a thing in the tower?
The Marquis seemed to know of it." "The pouther, ha! ha! ha!--the
Marquis, ha! ha! ha!" replied Caleb,--"if your honour were to brain me,
I behooved to laugh,--the Marquis--the pouther! Was it there? Ay, it was
there. Did he ken o't? My certie! the Marquis kenn'd o't, and it was the
best o' the game; for, when I couldna pacify your honour wi' a' that I
could say, I aye threw out a word mair about the gunpouther, and garr'd
the Marquis tak the job in his ain hand."

"But you have not answered my question," said the Master, impatiently;
"how came the powder there, and where is it now?"

"Ou, it came there, an ye maun needs ken," said Caleb, looking
mysteriously, and whispering, "when there was like to be a wee bit
rising here; and the Marquis, and a' the great lords of the north, were
a' in it, and mony a gudely gun and broadsword were ferried ower frae
Dunkirk forbye the pouther. Awfu' work we had getting them into the
tower under cloud o' night, for ye maun think it wasna everybody could
be trusted wi' sic kittle jobs. But if ye will gae hame to your supper,
I will tell you a' about it as ye gang down."

"And these wretched boys," said Ravenswood, "is it your pleasure they
are to sit there all night, to wait for the blowing up of a tower that
is not even on fire?"

"Surely not, if it is your honour's pleasure that they suld gang hame;
although," added Caleb, "it wadna do them a grain's damage: they wad
screigh less the next day, and sleep the sounder at e'en. But just as
your honour likes."

Stepping accordingly towards the urchins who manned the knolls near
which they stood, Caleb informed them, in an authoritative tone, that
their honours Lord Ravenswood and the Marquis of A---- had given orders
that the tower was not to be blow up till next day at noon. The boys
dispersed upon this comfortable assurance. One or two, however, followed
Caleb for more information, particularly the urchin whom he had cheated
while officiating as turnspit, who screamed, "Mr. Balderstone!--Mr.
Balderstone! then the castle's gane out like an auld wife's spunk?"

"To be sure it is, callant," said the butler; "do ye think the castle
of as great a lord as Lord Ravenswood wad continue in a bleeze, and him
standing looking on wi' his ain very een? It's aye right," continued
Caleb, shaking off his ragged page, and closing in to his Master, "to
train up weans, as the wise man says, in the way they should go, and,
aboon a', to teach them respect to their superiors."

"But all this while, Caleb, you have never told me what became of the
arms and powder," said Ravenswood.

"Why, as for the arms," said Caleb, "it was just like the bairn's
rhyme--

     Some gaed east and some gaed west,
     And some gaed to the craw's nest.

And for the pouther, I e'en changed it, as occasion served, with the
skippers o' Dutch luggers and French vessels, for gin and brandy, and is
served the house mony a year--a gude swap too, between what cheereth the
soul of man and that which hingeth it clean out of his body; forbye,
I keepit a wheen pounds of it for yoursell when ye wanted to take the
pleasure o' shooting: whiles, in these latter days, I wad hardly hae
kenn'd else whar to get pouther for your pleasure. And now that your
anger is ower, sir, wasna that weel managed o' me, and arena ye far
better sorted doun yonder than ye could hae been in your ain auld ruins
up-bye yonder, as the case stands wi' us now? the mair's the pity!"

"I believe you may be right, Caleb; but, before burning down my castle,
either in jest or in earnest," said Ravenswood, "I think I had a right
to be in the secret."

"Fie for shame, your honour!" replied Caleb; "it fits an auld carle like
me weel eneugh to tell lees for the credit of the family, but it wadna
beseem the like o' your honour's sell; besides, young folk are no
judicious: they cannot make the maist of a bit figment. Now this
fire--for a fire it sall be, if I suld burn the auld stable to make it
mair feasible--this fire, besides that it will be an excuse for asking
ony thing we want through the country, or doun at the haven--this
fire will settle mony things on an honourable footing for the family's
credit, that cost me telling twenty daily lees to a wheen idle chaps
and queans, and, what's waur, without gaining credence." "That was hard
indeed, Caleb; but I do not see how this fire should help your veracity
or your credit."

"There it is now?" said Caleb; "wasna I saying that young folk had a
green judgment? How suld it help me, quotha? It will be a creditable
apology for the honour of the family for this score of years to come, if
it is weel guided. 'Where's the family pictures?' says ae meddling body.
'The great fire at Wolf's Crag,' answers I. 'Where's the family plate?'
says another. 'The great fire,' says I; 'wha was to think of plate,
when life and limb were in danger?' 'Where's the wardrobe and the
linens?--where's the tapestries and the decorements?--beds of state,
twilts, pands and testors, napery and broidered wark?' 'The fire--the
fire--the fire.' Guide the fire weel, and it will serve ye for a' that
ye suld have and have not; and, in some sort, a gude excuse is better
than the things themselves; for they maun crack and wear out, and be
consumed by time, whereas a gude offcome, prudently and creditably
handled, may serve a nobleman and his family, Lord kens how lang!"

Ravenswood was too well acquainted with his butler's pertinacity and
self-opinion to dispute the point with him any farther. Leaving Caleb,
therefore, to the enjoyment of his own successful ingenuity, he returned
to the hamlet, where he found the Marquis and the good women of the
mansion under some anxiety--the former on account of his absence, the
others for the discredit their cookery might sustain by the delay of the
supper. All were now at ease, and heard with pleasure that the fire at
the castle had burned out of itself without reaching the vaults, which
was the only information that Ravenswood thought it proper to give in
public concerning the event of his butler's strategem.

They sat down to an excellent supper. No invitation could prevail on
Mr. and Mrs. Girder, even in their own house, to sit down at table with
guests of such high quality. They remained standing in the apartment,
and acted the part of respectful and careful attendants on the company.
Such were the manners of the time. The elder dame, confident through
her age and connexion with the Ravenswood family, was less scrupulously
ceremonious. She played a mixed part betwixt that of the hostess of an
inn and the mistress of a private house, who receives guests above her
own degree. She recommended, and even pressed, what she thought best,
and was herself easily entreated to take a moderate share of the good
cheer, in order to encourage her guests by her own example. Often she
interrupted herself, to express her regret that "my lord did not eat;
that the Master was pyking a bare bane; that, to be sure, there was
naething there fit to set before their honours; that Lord Allan, rest
his saul, used to like a pouthered guse, and said it was Latin for a
tass o' brandy; that the brandy came frae France direct; for, for a' the
English laws and gaugers, the Wolf's Hope brigs hadna forgotten the gate
to Dunkirk."

Here the cooper admonished his mother-in-law with his elbow, which
procured him the following special notice in the progress of her speech:

"Ye needna be dunshin that gate, John [Gibbie]," continued the old lady;
"naebody says that YE ken whar the brandy comes frae; and it wadna be
fitting ye should, and you the Queen's cooper; and what signifies't,"
continued she, addressing Lord Ravenswood, "to king, queen, or kaiser
whar an auld wife like me buys her pickle sneeshin, or her drap
brandy-wine, to haud her heart up?"

Having thus extricated herself from her supposed false step, Dame
Loup-the-Dyke proceeded, during the rest of the evening, to supply, with
great animation, and very little assistance from her guests, the funds
necessary for the support of the conversation, until, declining any
further circulation of their glass, her guests requested her permission
to retire to their apartments.

The Marquis occupied the chamber of dais, which, in every house above
the rank of a mere cottage, was kept sacred for such high occasions as
the present. The modern finishing with plaster was then unknown, and
tapestry was confined to the houses of the nobility and superior gentry.
The cooper, therefore, who was a man of some vanity, as well as some
wealth, had imitated the fashion observed by the inferior landholders
and clergy, who usually ornamented their state apartments with hangings
of a sort of stamped leather, manufactured in the Netherlands, garnished
with trees and animals executed in copper foil, and with many a pithy
sentence of morality, which, although couched in Low Dutch, were perhaps
as much attended to in practice as if written in broad Scotch. The
whole had somewhat of a gloomy aspect; but the fire, composed of
old pitch-barrel staves, blazed merrily up the chimney; the bed was
decorated with linen of most fresh and dazzling whiteness, which had
never before been used, and might, perhaps, have never been used at
all, but for this high occasion. On the toilette beside, stood an
old-fashioned mirror, in a fillagree frame, part of the dispersed finery
of the neighbouring castle. It was flanked by a long-necked bottle of
Florence wine, by which stood a glass nearly as tall, resembling
in shape that which Teniers usually places in the hands of his own
portrait, when he paints himself as mingling in the revels of a country
village. To counterbalance those foreign sentinels, there mounted guard
on the other side of the mirror two stout warders of Scottish lineage;
a jug, namely, of double ale, which held a Scotch pint, and a quaigh,
or bicker, of ivory and ebony, hooped with silver, the work of
John Girder's own hands, and the pride of his heart. Besides these
preparations against thirst, there was a goodly diet-loaf, or sweet
cake; so that, with such auxiliaries, the apartment seemed victualled
against a siege of two or three days.

It only remains to say, that the Marquis's valet was in attendance,
displaying his master's brocaded nightgown, and richly embroidered
velvet cap, lined and faced with Brussels lace, upon a huge leathern
easy-chair, wheeled round so as to have the full advantage of the
comfortable fire which we have already mentioned. We therefore commit
that eminent person to his night's repose, trusting he profited by the
ample preparations made for his accommodation--preparations which we
have mentioned in detail, as illustrative of ancient Scottish manners.

It is not necessary we should be equally minute in describing the
sleeping apartment of the Master of Ravenswood, which was that usually
occupied by the goodman and goodwife themselves. It was comfortably
hung with a sort of warm-coloured worsted, manufactured in Scotland,
approaching in trexture to what is now called shalloon. A staring
picture of John [Gibbie] Girder himself ornamented this dormiory,
painted by a starving Frenchman, who had, God knows how or why, strolled
over from Flushing or Dunkirk to Wolf's Hope in a smuggling dogger. The
features were, indeed, those of the stubborn, opinionative, yet sensible
artisan, but Monsieur had contrived to throw a French grace into the
look and manner, so utterly inconsistent with the dogged gravity of the
original, that it was impossible to look at it without laughing. John
and his family, however, piqued themselves not a little upon this
picture, and were proportionably censured by the neighbourhood, who
pronounced that the cooper, in sitting for the same, and yet more in
presuming to hang it up in his bedchamber, had exceeded his privilege as
the richest man of the village; at once stept beyond the bounds of his
own rank, and encroached upon those of the superior orders; and,
in fine, had been guilty of a very overweening act of vanity and
presumption. Respect for the memory of my deceased friend, Mr. Richard
Tinto, has obliged me to treat this matter at some length; but I spare
the reader his prolix though curious observations, as well upon the
character of the French school as upon the state of painting in Scotland
at the beginning of the 18th century.

The other preparations of the Master's sleeping apartment were similar
to those in the chamber of dais.

At the usual early hour of that period, the Marquis of A---- and his
kinsman prepared to resume their journey. This could not be done
without an ample breakfast, in which cold meat and hot meat, and oatmeal
flummery, wine and spirits, and milk varied by every possible mode of
preparation, evinced the same desire to do honour to their guests which
had been shown by the hospitable owners of the mansion upon the evening
before. All the bustle of preparation for departure now resounded
through Wolf's Hope. There was paying of bills and shaking of hands,
and saddling of horses, and harnessing of carriages, and distributing
of drink-money. The Marquis left a broad piece for the gratification
of John Girder's household, which he, the said John, was for some time
disposed to convert to his own use; Dingwall, the writer, assuring
him he was justified in so doing, seeing he was the disburser of
those expenses which were the occasion of the gratification. But,
notwithstanding this legal authority, John could not find in his heart
to dim the splendour of his late hospitality by picketing anything in
the nature of a gratuity. He only assured his menials he would consider
them as a damned ungrateful pack if they bought a gill of brandy
elsewhere than out of his own stores; and as the drink-money was likely
to go to its legitimate use, he comforted himself that, in this manner,
the Marquis's donative would, without any impeachment of credit and
character, come ultimately into his own exclusive possession.

While arrangements were making for departure, Ravenswood made blythe the
heart of his ancient butler by informing him, cautiously however (for
he knew Caleb's warmth of imagination), of the probable change which was
about to take place in his fortunes. He deposited with Balderstone, at
the same time, the greater part of his slender funds, with an assurance,
which he was obliged to reiterate more than once, that he himself had
sufficient supplies in certain prospect. He therefore enjoined Caleb, as
he valued his favour, to desist from all farther maneouvres against the
inhabitants of Wolf's Hope, their cellars, poultry-yards, and substance
whatsoever. In this prohibition, the old domestic acquiesced more
readily than his master expected.

"It was doubtless," he said, "a shame, a discredit, and a sin to harry
the puir creatures, when the family were in circumstances to live
honourably on their ain means; and there might be wisdom," he added, "in
giving them a while's breathing-time at any rate, that they might be the
more readily brought forward upon his honour's future occasions."

This matter being settled, and having taken an affectionate farewell of
his old domestic, the Master rejoined his noble relative, who was now
ready to enter his carriage. The two landladies, old and young, having
received in all kindly greeting a kiss from each of their noble guests,
stood simpering at the door of their house, as the coach and six,
followed by its train of clattering horsemen, thundered out of the
village. John Girder also stood upon his threshold, now looking at his
honoured right hand, which had been so lately shaken by a marquis and
a lord, and now giving a glance into the interior of his mansion, which
manifested all the disarray of the late revel, as if balancing
the distinction which he had attained with the expenses of the
entertainment.

At length he opened his oracular jaws. "Let every man and woman here set
about their ain business, as if there was nae sic thing as marquis or
master, duke or drake, laird or lord, in this world. Let the house be
redd up, the broken meat set bye, and if there is ony thing totally
uneatable, let it be gien to the puir folk; and, gude mother and wife, I
hae just ae thing to entreat ye, that ye will never speak to me a single
word, good or bad, anent a' this nonsense wark, but keep a' your cracks
about it to yoursells and your kimmers, for my head is weel-nigh dung
donnart wi' it already."

As John's authority was tolerably absolute, all departed to their usual
occupations, leaving him to build castles in the air, if he had a mind,
upon the court favour which he had acquired by the expenditure of his
worldly substance.




CHAPTER XXVII.

     Why, now I have Dame Fortune by the Forelock,
     And if she escapes my grasp, the fault is mine;
     He that hath buffeted with stern adversity
     Best knows the shape his course to favouring breezes.

     Old Play.

OUR travellers reach Edinburgh without any farther adventure, and the
Master of Ravenswood, as had been previously settled, took up his abode
with his noble friend.

In the mean time, the political crisis which had been expected took
place, and the Tory party obtained in the Scottish, as in the English,
councils of Queen Anne a short-lived ascendency, of which it is not our
business to trace either the cause or consequences. Suffice it to say,
that it affected the different political parties according to the nature
of their principles. In England, many of the High Church party, with
Harley, afterwards Earl of Oxford, at their head, affected to separate
their principles from those of the Jacobites, and, on that account,
obtained the denomination of Whimsicals. The Scottish High Church party,
on the contrary, or, as they termed themselves, the Cavaliers, were more
consistent, if not so prudent, in their politics, and viewed all the
changes now made as preparatory to calling to the throne, upon the
queen's demise, her brother the Chevalier de St. George. Those who had
suffered in his service now entertained the most unreasonable hopes,
not only of indemnification, but of vengeance upon their political
adversaries; while families attached to the Whig interest saw nothing
before them but a renewal of the hardships they had undergone during the
reigns of Charles the Second and his brother, and a retaliation of the
confiscation which had been inflicted upon the Jacobites during that of
King William.

But the most alarmed at the change of system was that prudential set of
persons, some of whom are found in all governments, but who abound in a
provincial administration like that of Scotland during the period,
and who are what Cromwell called waiters upon Providence, or, in other
words, uniform adherents to the party who are uppermost. Many of these
hastened to read their recantation to the Marquis of A----; and, as
it was easily seen that he took a deep interest in the affairs of
his kinsman, the Master of Ravenswood, they were the first to suggest
measures for retrieving at least a part of his property, and for
restoring him in blood against his father's attainder.

Old Lord Turntippet professed to be one of the most anxious for the
success of these measures; for "it grieved him to the very saul," he
said, "to see so brave a young gentleman, of sic auld and undoubted
nobility, and, what was mair than a' that, a bluid relation of the
Marquis of A----, the man whom," he swore, "he honoured most upon
the face of the earth, brougth to so severe a pass. For his ain
puir peculiar," as he said, "and to contribute something to the
rehabilitation of sae auld ane house," the said Turntippet sent in three
family pictures lacking the frames, and six high-backed chairs, with
worked Turkey cushions, having the crest of Ravenswood broidered
thereon, without charging a penny either of the principal or interest
they had cost him, when he bought them, sixteen years before, at a roup
of the furniture of Lord Ravenswood's lodgings in the Canongate.

Much more to Lord Turntippet's dismay than to his surprise, although
he affected to feel more of the latter than the former, the Marquis
received his gift very drily, and observed, that his lordship's
restitution, if he expected it to be received by the Master of
Ravenswood and his friends, must comprehend a pretty large farm, which,
having been mortgaged to Turntippet for a very inadequate sum, he had
contrived, during the confusion of the family affairs, and by means
well understood by the lawyers of that period, to acquire to himself in
absolute property.

The old time-serving lord winced excessively under the requisition,
protesting to God, that he saw no occasion the lad could have for the
instant possession of the land, seeing he would doubtless now recover
the bulk of his estate from Sir William Ashton, to which he was ready to
contribute by every means in his power, as was just and reasonable; and
finally declaring, that he was willing to settle the land on the young
gentleman after his own natural demise.

But all these excuses availed nothing, and he was compelled to disgorge
the property, on receiving back the sum for which it had been mortgaged.
Having no other means of making peace with the higher powers, he
returned home sorrowful and malcontent, complaining to his confidants,
"That every mutation or change in the state had hitherto been productive
of some sma' advantage to him in his ain quiet affairs; but that the
present had--pize upon it!--cost him one of the best penfeathers o' his
wing."

Similar measures were threatened against others who had profited by
the wreck of the fortune of Ravenswood; and Sir William Ashton, in
particular, was menaced with an appeal to the House of Peers, a court
of equity, against the judicial sentences, proceeding upon a strict and
severe construction of the letter of the law, under which he held the
castle and barony of Ravenswood. With him, however, the Master, as well
for Lucy's sake as on account of the hospitality he had received from
him, felt himself under the necessity of proceeding with great candor.
He wrote to the late Lord Keeper, for he no longer held that office,
stating frankly the engagement which existed between him and Miss
Ashton, requesting his permission for their union, and assuring him of
his willingness to put the settlement of all matters between them upon
such a footing as Sir William himself should think favourable.

The same messenger was charged with a letter to Lady Ashton, deprecating
any cause of displeasure which the Master might unintentionally have
given her, enlarging upon his attachment to Miss Ashton, and the length
to which it had proceeded, and conjuring the lady, as a Douglas in
nature as well as in name, generously to forget ancient prejudices and
misunderstandings, and to believe that the family had acquired a friend,
and she herself a respectful and attached humble servant, in him who
subscribed himself, "Edgar, Master of Ravenswood." A third letter
Ravenswood addressed to Lucy, and the messenger was instructed to find
some secret and secure means of delivering it into her own hands. It
contained the strongest protestations of continued affection, and
dwelt upon the approaching change of the writer's fortunes, as chiefly
valuable by tending to remove the impediments to their union. He related
the steps he had taken to overcome the prejudices of her parents,
and especially of her mother, and expressed his hope they might prove
effectual. If not, he still trusted that his absence from Scotland upon
an important and honourable mission might give time for prejudices to
die away; while he hoped and trusted Miss Ashton's constancy, on which
he had the most implicit reliance, would baffle any effort that might
be used to divert her attachment. Much more there was, which, however
interesting to the lovers themselves, would afford the reader neither
interest nor information. To each of these three letters the Master of
Ravenswood received an answer, but by different means of conveyance, and
certainly couched in very different styles.

Lady Ashton answered his letter by his own messenger, who was not
allowed to remain at Ravenswood a moment longer than she was engaged
in penning these lines.

"For the hand of Mr. Ravenswood of Wolf's Crag--These:

"SIR, UNKNOWN:

"I have received a letter, signed 'Edgar, Master of Ravenswood,'
concerning the writer whereof I am uncertain, seeing that the honours of
such a family were forfeited for high treason in the person of Allan,
late Lord Ravenswood. Sir, if you shall happen to be the person so
subscribing yourself, you will please to know, that I claim the full
interest of a parent in Miss Lucy Ashton, which I have disposed of
irrevocably in behalf of a worthy person. And, sir, were this otherwise,
I would not listen to a proposal from you, or any of your house, seeing
their hand has been uniformly held up against the freedom of the subject
and the immunities of God's kirk. Sir, it is not a flightering blink of
prosperity which can change my constant opinion in this regard, seeing
it has been my lot before now, like holy David, to see the wicked great
in power and flourishing like a green bay-tree; nevertheless I passed,
and they were not, and the place thereof knew them no more. Wishing you
to lay these things to your heart for your own sake, so far as they may
concern you, I pray you to take no farther notice of her who desires to
remain your unknown servant,

"MARGARET DOUGLAS,

"otherwise ASHTON."


About two days after he had received this very unsatisfactory epistle,
the Master of Ravenswood, while walking up the High Street of Edinburgh,
was jostled by a person, in whom, as the man pulled off his hat to make
an apology, he recognized Lockhard, the confidential domestic of
Sir William Ashton. The man bowed, slipt a letter into his hand, and
disappeared. The packet contained four close-written folios, from which,
however, as is sometimes incident to the compositions of great lawyers,
little could be extracted, excepting that the writer felt himself in a
very puzzling predicament.

Sir William spoke at length of his high value and regard for his dear
young friend, the Master of Ravenswood, and of his very extreme high
value and regard for the Marquis of A----, his very dear old friend;
he trusted that any measures that they might adopt, in which he was
concerned, would be carred on with due regard to the sanctity of
decreets and judgments obtained in foro contentioso; protesting, before
men and angels, that if the law of Scotland, as declared in her supreme
courts, were to undergo a reversal in the English House of Lords, the
evils which would thence arise to the public would inflict a greater
wound upon his heart than any loss he might himself sustain by such
irregular proceedings. He flourished much on generosity and forgiveness
of mutual injuries, and hinted at the mutability of human affairs,
always favourite topics with the weaker party in politics. He
pathetically lamented, and gently censured, the haste which had been
used in depriving him of his situation of Lord Keeper, which his
experience had enabled him to fill with some advantage to the public,
without so much as giving him an opportunity of explaining how far his
own views of general politics might essentially differ from those now in
power. He was convinced the Marquis of A---- had as sincere intentions
towards the public as himself or any man; and if, upon a conference,
they could have agreed upon the measures by which it was to be pursued,
his experience and his interest should have gone to support the present
administration. Upon the engagement betwixt Ravenswood and his daughter,
he spoke in a dry and confused manner. He regretted so premature a
step as the engagement of the young people should have been taken, and
conjured the Master to remember he had never given any encouragement
thereunto; and observed that, as a transaction inter minores, and
without concurrence of his daughter's natural curators, the engagement
was inept, and void in law. This precipitate measure, he added, had
produced a very bad effect upon Lady Ashton's mind, which it was
impossible at present to remove. Her son, Colonel Douglas Ashton, had
embraced her prejudices in the fullest extent, and it was impossible for
Sir William to adopt a course disagreeable to them without a fatal and
irreconcilable breach in his family; which was not at present to be
thought of. Time, the great physician, he hoped, would mend all.

In a postscript, Sir William said something more explicitly, which
seemed to intimate that, rather than the law of Scotland should sustain
a severe wound through his sides, by a reversal of the judgment of her
supreme courts, in the case of the barony of Ravenswood, through the
intervention of what, with all submission, he must term a foreign court
of appeal, he himself would extrajudically consent to considerable
sacrifices.

From Lucy Ashton, by some unknown conveyance, the Master received the
following lines: "I received yours, but it was at the utmost risk; do
not attempt to write again till better times. I am sore beset, but I
will be true to my word, while the exercise of my reason is vouchsafed
to me. That you are happy and prosperous is some consolation, and my
situation requires it all." The note was signed "L.A."

This letter filled Ravenswood with the most lively alarm. He made many
attempts, notwithstanding her prohibition, to convey letters to Miss
Ashton, and even to obtain an interview; but his plans were frustrated,
and he had only the mortification to learn that anxious and effectual
precautions had been taken to prevent the possibility of their
correspondence. The Master was the more distressed by these
circumstances, as it became impossible to delay his departure from
Scotland, upon the important mission which had been confided to him.
Before his departure, he put Sir William Ashton's letter into the hands
of the Marquis of A----, who observed with a smile, that Sir William's
day of grace was past, and that he had now to learn which side of the
hedge the sun had got to. It was with the greatest difficulty that
Ravenswood extorted from the Marquis a promise that he would compromise
the proceedings in Parliament, providing Sir William should be disposed
to acquiesce in a union between him and Lucy Ashton.

"I would hardly," said the Marquis, "consent to your throwing away your
birthright in this manner, were I not perfectly confident that Lady
Ashton, or Lady Douglas, or whatever she calls herself, will, as
Scotchmen say, keep her threep; and that her husband dares not
contradict her."

"But yet," said the Master, "I trust your lordship will consider my
engagement as sacred."

"Believe my word of honour," said the Marquis, "I would be a friend even
to your follies; and having thus told you MY opinion, I will endeavour,
as occasion offers, to serve you according to your own."

The master of Ravenswood could but thank his generous kinsman and
patron, and leave him full power to act in all his affairs. He departed
from Scotland upon his mission, which, it was supposed, might detain him
upon the continent for some months.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

     Was ever woman in this humor wooed?
     Was ever woman in this humour won?
     I'll have her.

     Richard III.

TWELVE months had passed away since the Master of Ravenswood's departure
for the continent, and, although his return to Scotland had been
expected in a much shorter space, yet the affairs of his mission,
or, according to a prevailing report, others of a nature personal to
himself, still detained him abroad. In the mean time, the altered state
of affairs in Sir William Ashton's family may be gathered from the
following conversation which took place betwixt Bucklaw and his
confidential bottle companion and dependant, the noted Captain
Craigengelt. They were seated on either side of the huge
sepulchral-looking freestone chimney in the low hall at Girnington.
A wood fire blazed merrily in the grate; a round oaken table, placed
between them, supported a stoup of excellent claret, two rummer glasses,
and other good cheer; and yet, with all these appliances and means
to boot, the countenance of the patron was dubious, doubtful, and
unsatisfied, while the invention of his dependant was taxed to the
utmost to parry what he most dreaded, a fit, as he called it, of
the sullens, on the part of his protector. After a long pause, only
interrupted by the devil's tattoo, which Bucklaw kept beating against
the hearth with the toe of his boot, Craigengelt at last ventured to
break silence. "May I be double distanced," said he, "if ever I saw a
man in my life have less the air of a bridegroom! Cut me out of feather,
if you have not more the look of a man condemned to be hanged!"

"My kind thanks for the compliment," replied Bucklaw; "but I suppose you
think upon the predicament in which you yourself are most likely to be
placed; and pray, Captain Craigengelt, if it please your worship, why
should I look merry, when I'm sad, and devilish sad too?"

"And that's what vexes me," said Craigengelt. "Here is this match, the
best in the whole country, and which were so anxious about, is on the
point of being concluded, and you are as sulky as a bear that has lost
its whelps."

"I do not know," answered the Laird, doggedly, "whether I should
conclude or not, if it was not that I am too far forwards to leap back."

"Leap back!" exclaimed Craigengelt, with a well-assumed air of
astonishment, "that would be playing the back-game with a witness! Leap
back! Why, is not the girl's fortune----"

"The young lady's, if you please," said Hayston, interrupting him.

"Well--well, no disrespect meant. Will Miss Ashton's tocher not weigh
against any in Lothian?"

"Granted," answered Bucklaw; "but I care not a penny for her tocher; I
have enough of my own."

"And the mother, that loves you like her own child?"

"Better than some of her children, I believe," said Bucklaw, "or there
would be little love wared on the matter."

"And Colonel Sholto Douglas Ashton, who desires the marriage above all
earthly things?"

"Because," said Bucklaw, "he expects to carry the county of ---- through
my interest."

"And the father, who is as keen to see the match concluded as ever I
have been to win a main?"

"Ay," said Bucklaw, in the same disparaging manner, "it lies with Sir
William's policy to secure the next best match, since he cannot barter
his child to save the great Ravenswood estate, which the English House
of Lords are about to wrench out of his clutches."

"What say you to the young lady herself?" said Craigengelt; "the finest
young woman in all Scotland, one that you used to be so fond of when she
was cross, and now she consents to have you, and gives up her engagement
with Ravenswood, you are for jibbing. I must say, the devil's in ye,
when ye neither know what you would have nor what you would want."

"I'll tell you my meaning in a word," answered Bucklaw, getting up and
walking through the room; "I want to know what the devil is the cause of
Miss Ashton's changing her mind so suddenly?"

"And what need you care," said Craigengelt, "since the change is in your
favour?"

"I'll tell you what it is," returned his patron, "I never knew much of
that sort of fine ladies, and I believe they may be as capricious as the
devil; but there is something in Miss Ashton's change a devilish deal
too sudden and too serious for a mere flisk of her own. I'll be bound,
Lady Ashton understands every machine for breaking in the human
mind, and there are as many as there are cannon-bit, martingales, and
cavessons for young colts."

"And if that were not the case," said Craigengelt, "how the devil should
we ever get them into training at all?"

"And that's true too," said Bucklaw, suspending his march through the
dining-room, and leaning upon the back of a chair. "And besides,
here's Ravenswood in the way still, do you think he'll give up Lucy's
engagement?"

"To be sure he will," answered Craigengelt; "what good can it do him to
refuse, since he wishes to marry another woman and she another man?"

"And you believe seriously," said Bucklaw, "that he is going to marry
the foreign lady we heard of?"

"You heard yourself," answered Craigengelt, "what Captain Westenho said
about it, and the great preparation made for their blythesome bridal."

"Captain Westenho," replied Bucklaw, "has rather too much of your own
cast about, Craigie, to make what Sir William would call a 'famous
witness.' He drinks deep, plays deep, swears deep, and I suspect can lie
and cheat a little into the bargain; useful qualities, Craigie, if
kept in their proper sphere, but which have a little too much of the
freebooter to make a figure in a court of evidence."

"Well, then," said Craigengelt, "will you believe Colonel Douglas
Ashton, who heard the Marquis of A---- say in a public circle, but not
aware that he was within ear-shot, that his kinsman had made a
better arrangement for himself than to give his father's land for the
pale-cheeked daughter of a broken-down fanatic, and that Bucklaw was
welcome to the wearing of Ravenswood's shaughled shoes."

"Did he say so, by heavens!" cried Bucklaw, breaking out into one of
those incontrollable fits of passion to which he was constitutionally
subject; "if I had heard him, I would have torn the tongue out of his
throat before all his peats and minions, and Highland bullies into the
bargain. Why did not Ashton run him through the body?"

"Capot me if I know," said the Captain. "He deserved it sure enough; but
he is an old man, and a minister of state, and there would be more risk
than credit in meddling with him. You had more need to think of making
up to Miss Lucy Ashton the disgrace that's like to fall upon her than of
interfering with a man too old to fight, and on too high a tool for your
hand to reach him."

"It SHALL reach him, though, one day," said Bucklaw, "and his kinsman
Ravenswood to boot. In the mean time, I'll take care Miss Ashton
receives no discredit for the slight they have put upon her. It's an
awkward job, however, and I wish it were ended; I scarce know how to
talk to her,--but fill a bumper, Craigie, and we'll drink her health.
It grows late, and a night-cowl of good claret is worth all the
considering-caps in Europe."




CHAPTER XXIX.

     It was the copy of our conference.
     In bed she slept not, for my urging it;
     At board she fed not, for my urging it;
     Alone, it was the subject of my theme;
     In company I often glanced at it.

     Comedy of Errors.

THE next morning saw Bucklaw and his faithful Achates, Craigengelt, at
Ravenswood Castle. They were most courteously received by the knight
and his lady, as well, as by their son and heir, Colonel Ashton. After
a good deal of stammering and blushing--for Bucklaw, notwithstanding his
audacity in other matters, had all the sheepish bashfulness common to
those who have lived little in respectable society--he contrived at
length to explain his wish to be admitted to a conference with Miss
Ashton upon the subject of their approaching union. Sir William and
his son looked at Lady Ashton, who replied with the greatest composure,
"That Lucy would wait upon Mr. Hayston directly. I hope," she added with
a smile, "that as Lucy is very young, and has been lately trepanned into
an engagement of which she is now heartily ashamed, our dear Bucklaw
will excuse her wish that I should be present at their interview?"

"In truth, my dear lady," said Bucklaw, "it is the very thing that
I would have desired on my own account; for I have been so little
accustomed to what is called gallantry, that I shall certainly fall into
some cursed mistake unless I have the advantage of your ladyship as an
interpreter."

It was thus that Bucklaw, in the perturbation of his embarrassment upon
this critical occasion, forgot the just apprehensions he had entertained
of Lady Ashton's overbearing ascendency over her daughter's mind, and
lost an opportunity of ascertaining, by his own investigation, the real
state of Lucy's feelings.

The other gentlemen left the room, and in a short time Lady Ashton,
followed by her daughter, entered the apartment. She appeared, as he had
seen her on former occasions, rather composed than agitated; but a nicer
judge than he could scarce have determined whether her calmness was that
of despair or of indifference. Bucklaw was too much agitated by his own
feelings minutely to scrutinise those of the lady. He stammered out an
unconnected address, confounding together the two or three topics to
which it related, and stopt short before he brought it to any regular
conclusion. Miss Ashton listened, or looked as if she listened, but
returned not a single word in answer, continuing to fix her eyes on
a small piece of embroidery on which, as if by instinct or habit, her
fingers were busily employed. Lady Ashton sat at some distance, almost
screened from notice by the deep embrasure of the window in which she
had placed her chair. From this she whispered, in a tone of voice
which, though soft and sweet, had something in it of admonition, if not
command: "Lucy, my dear, remember--have you heard what Bucklaw has been
saying?"

The idea of her mother's presence seemed to have slipped from the
unhappy girl's recollection. She started, dropped her needle, and
repeated hastily, and almost in the same breath, the contradictory
answers: "Yes, madam--no, my lady--I beg pardon, I did not hear."

"You need not blush, my love, and still less need you look so pale and
frightened," said Lady Ashton, coming forward; "we know that maiden's
ears must be slow in receiving a gentleman's language; but you must
remember Mr. Hayston speaks on a subject on which you have long since
agreed to give him a favourable hearing. You know how much your father
and I have our hearts set upon an event so extremely desirable."

In Lady Ashton's voice, a tone of impressive, and even stern, innuendo
was sedulously and skilfully concealed under an appearance of the most
affectionate maternal tenderness. The manner was for Bucklaw, who was
easily enough imposed upon; the matter of the exhortation was for the
terrified Lucy, who well knew how to interpret her mother's hints,
however skilfully their real purport might be veiled from general
observation.

Miss Ashton sat upright in her chair, cast round her a glance in which
fear was mingled with a still wilder expression, but remained perfectly
silent. Bucklaw, who had in the mean time paced the room to and fro,
until he had recovered his composure, now stopped within two or three
yards of her chair, and broke out as follows: "I believe I have been a
d--d fool, Miss Ashton; I have tried to speak to you as people tell me
young ladies like to be talked to, and I don't think you comprehend
what I have been saying; and no wonder, for d--n me if I understand it
myself! But, however, once for all, and in broad Scotch, your father and
mother like what is proposed, and if you can take a plain young fellow
for your husband, who will never cross you in anything you have a mind
to, I will place you at the head of the best establishment in the three
Lothians; you shall have Lady Girnington's lodging in the Canongate of
Edinburgh, go where you please, do what you please, and see what you
please--and that's fair. Only I must have a corner at the board-end for
a worthless old playfellow of mine, whose company I would rather want
than have, if it were not that the d--d fellow has persuaded me that I
can't do without him; and so I hope you won't except against Craigie,
although it might be easy to find much better company."

"Now, out upon you, Bucklaw," said Lady Ashton, again interposing;
"how can you think Lucy can have any objection to that blunt, honest,
good-natured creature, Captain Craigengelt?"

"Why, madam," replied Bucklaw, "as to Craigie's sincerity, honesty, and
good-nature, they are, I believe, pretty much upon a par; but that's
neither here nor there--the fellow knows my ways, and has got useful to
me, and I cannot well do without him, as I said before. But all this is
nothing to the purpose; for since I have mustered up courage to make a
plain proposal, I would fain hear Miss Ashton, from her own lips, give
me a plain answer."

"My dear Bucklaw," said Lady Ashton, "let me spare Lucy's bashfulness.
I tell you, in her presence, that she has already consented to be guided
by her father and me in this matter. Lucy, my love," she added, with
that singular combination of suavity of tone and pointed energy which we
have already noticed--"Lucy, my dearest love! speak for yourself, is it
not as I say?"

Her victim answered in a tremulous and hollow voice: "I HAVE promised to
obey you--but upon one condition."

"She means," said Lady Ashton, turning to Bucklaw, "she expects an
answer to the demand which she has made upon the man at Vienna, or
Ratisbon, or Paris--or where is he?--for restitution of the engagement
in which he had the art to involve her. You will not, I am sure, my dear
friend, think it is wrong that she should feel much delicacy upon this
head; indeed, it concerns us all."

"Perfectly right--quite fair," said Bucklaw, half humming, half speaking
the end of the old song--

     "It is best to be off wi' the old love
     Before you be on wi' the new.

But I thought," said he, pausing, "you might have had an answer six
times told from Ravenswood. D--n me, if I have not a mind to go fetch
one myself, if Miss Ashton will honour me with the commission."

"By no means," said Lady Ashton; "we have had the utmost difficulty of
preventing Douglas, for whom it would be more proper, from taking so
rash a step; and do you think we could permit you, my good friend,
almost equally dear to us, to go to a desperate man upon an errand so
desperate? In fact, all the friends of the family are of opinion, and my
dear Lucy herself ought so to think, that, as this unworthy person has
returned no answer to her letter, silence must on this, as in other
cases, be held to give consent, and a contract must be supposed to be
given up, when the party waives insisting upon it. Sir William, who
should know best, is clear upon this subject; and therefore, my dear
Lucy----"

"Madam," said Lucy, with unwonted energy, "urge me no farther; if this
unhappy engagement be restored, I have already said you shall dispose
of me as you will; till then I should commit a heavy sin in the sight
of God and man in doing what you require." "But, my love, if this man
remains obstinately silent----"

"He will NOT be silent," answered Lucy; "it is six weeks since I sent
him a double of my former letter by a sure hand."

"You have not--you could not--you durst not," said Lady Ashton, with
violence inconsistent with the tone she had intended to assume; but
instantly correcting herself, "My dearest Lucy," said she, in her
sweetest tone of expostulation, "how could you think of such a thing?"

"No matter," said Bucklaw; "I respect Miss Ashton for her sentiments,
and I only wish I had been her messenger myself."

"And pray how long, Miss Ashton," said her mother, ironically, "are
we to wait the return of your Pacolet--your fairy messenger--since our
humble couriers of flesh and blood could not be trusted in this matter?"

"I have numbered weeks, days, hours, and minutes," said Miss Ashton;
"within another week I shall have an answer, unless he is dead. Till
that time, sir," she said, addressing Bucklaw, "let me be thus far
beholden to you, that you will beg my mother to forbear me upon this
subject."

"I will make it my particular entreaty to Lady Ashton," said Bucklaw.
"By my honour, madam, I respect your feelings; and, although the
prosecution of this affair be rendered dearer to me than ever, yet, as
I am a gentleman, I would renounce it, were it so urged as to give you a
moment's pain."

"Mr. Hayston, I think, cannot comprehend that," said Lady Ashton,
looking pale with anger, "when the daughter's happiness lies in the
bosom of the mother. Let me ask you, Miss Ashton, in what terms your
last letter was couched?"

"Exactly in the same, madam," answered Lucy, "which you dictated on a
former occasion."

"When eight days have elapsed, then," said her mother, resuming her tone
of tenderness, "we shall hope, my dearest love, that you will end this
suspense."

"Miss Ashton must not be hurried, madam," said Bucklaw, whose bluntness
of feeling did not by any means arise from want of good-nature;
"messengers may be stopped or delayed. I have known a day's journey
broke by the casting of a foreshoe. Stay, let me see my calendar: the
twentieth day from this is St. Jude's, and the day before I must be at
Caverton Edge, to see the match between the Laird of Kittlegirth's black
mare and Johnston the meal-monger's four-year-old-colt; but I can ride
all night, or Craigie can bring me word how the match goes; and I hope,
in the mean time, as I shall not myself distress Miss Ashton with any
further importunity, that your ladyship yourself, and Sir William, and
Colonel Douglas will have the goodness to allow her uninterrupted time
for making up her mind."

"Sir," said Miss Ashton, "you are generous."

"As for that, madam," answered Bucklaw, "I only pretend to be a plain,
good-humoured young fellow, as I said before, who will willingly make you
happy if you will permit him, and show him how to do so." Having said
this, he saluted her with more emotion than was consistent with
his usual train of feeling, and took his leave; Lady Ashton, as she
accompanied him out of the apartment, assuring him that her daughter did
full justice to the sincerity of his attachment, and requesting him to
see Sir William before his departure, "since," as she said, with a keen
glance reverting towards Lucy, "against St. Jude's day, we must all be
ready to SIGN AND SEAL."

"To sign and seal!" echoed Lucy, in a muttering tone, as the door of the
apartment closed--"to sign and seal--to do and die!" and, clasping her
extenuated hands together, she sunk back on the easy-chair she occupied,
in a state resembling stupor.

From this she was shortly after awakened by the boisterous entry of her
brother Henry, who clamorously reminded her of a promise to give him
two yards of carnation ribbon to make knots to his new garters. With the
most patient composure Lucy arose, and opening a little ivory cabinet,
sought out the ribbon the lad waned, measured it accurately, cut it off
into proper lengths, and knotted it into the fashion his boyish whim
required.

"Dinna shut the cabinet yet," said Henry, "for I must have some of your
silver wire to fasten the bells to my hawk's jesses,--and yet the new
falcon's not worth them neither; for do you know, after all the plague
we had to get her from an eyrie, all the way at Posso, in Mannor Water,
she's going to prove, after all, nothing better than a rifler: she just
wets her singles in the blood of the partridge, and then breaks away,
and lets her fly; and what good can the poor bird do after that, you
know, except pine and die in the first heather-cow or whin-bush she can
crawl into?"

"Right, Henry--right--very right," said Luch, mournfully, holding the
boy fast by the hand, after she had given him the wire he wanted; "but
there are more riflers in the world than your falcon, and more wounded
birds that seek but to die in quiet, that can find neither brake nor
whin-bush to hide their head in."

"Ah! that's some speech out of your romances," said the boy; "and Sholto
says they have turned your head. But I hear Norman whistling to the
hawk; I must go fasten on the jesses."

And he scampered away with the thoughtless gaiety of boyhood, leaving
his sister to the bitterness of her own reflections.

"It is decreed," she said, "that every living creature, even those who
owe me most kindness, are to shun me, and leave me to those by whom I am
beset. It is just it should be thus. Alone and uncounselled, I involved
myself in these perils; alone and uncounselled, I must extricate myself
or die."




CHAPTER XXX.

     What doth ensue
     But moody and dull melancholy,
     Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair,
     And at her heel, a huge infectious troop
     Of pale distemperatures, and foes to life?

     Comedy of Errors.

AS some vindication of the ease with which Bucklaw (who otherwise, as
he termed himself, was really a very good-humoured fellow) resigned his
judgment to the management of Lady Ashton, while paying his addresses
to her daughter, the reader must call to mind the strict domestic
discipline which, at this period, was exercised over the females of a
Scottish family.

The manners of the country in this, as in many other respects, coincided
with those of France before the Revolution. Young women of the higher
rank seldom mingled in society until after marriage, and, both in law
and fact, were held to be under the strict tutelage of their parents,
who were too apt to enforce the views for their settlement in life
without paying any regard to the inclination of the parties chiefly
interested. On such occasions, the suitor expected little more from his
bride than a silent acquiescence in the will of her parents; and as few
opportunities of acquaintance, far less of intimacy, occurred, he made
his choice by the outside, as the lovers in the Merchant of Venice
select the casket, contented to trust to chance the issue of the lottery
in which he had hazarded a venture.

It was not therefore surprising, such being the general manners of the
age, that Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw, whom dissipated habits had detached
in some degree from the best society, should not attend particularly to
those feelings in his elected bride to which many men of more sentiment,
experience, and reflection would, in all probability, have been equally
indifferent. He knew what all accounted the principal point, that her
parents and friends, namely, were decidedly in his favour, and that
there existed most powerful reasons for their predilection.

In truth, the conduct of the Marquis of A----, since Ravenswood's
departure, had been such as almost to bar the possibility of his
kinsman's union with Lucy Ashton. The Marquis was Ravenswood's sincere
but misjudging friend; or rather, like many friends and patrons,
he consulted what he considered to be his relation's true interest,
although he knew that in doing so he ran counter to his inclinations.

The Marquis drove on, therefore, with the plentitude of ministerial
authority, an appeal to the British House of Peers against those
judgments of the courts of law by which Sir William became possessed of
Ravenswood's hereditary property. As this measure, enforced with all the
authority of power, was new in Scottish judicial proceedings, though now
so frequently resorted to, it was exclaimed against by the lawyers
on the opposite side of politics, as an interference with the civil
judicature of the country, equally new, arbitrary, and tyrannical. And
if it thus affected even strangers connected with them only by political
party, it may be guessed what the Ashton family themselves said
and thought under so gross a dispensation. Sir William, still more
worldly-minded than he was timid, was reduced to despair by the loss
by which he was threatened. His son's haughtier spirit was exalted into
rage at the idea of being deprived of his expected patrimony. But to
Lady Ashton's yet more vindictive temper the conduct of Ravenswood, or
rather of his patron, appeared to be an offence challenging the deepest
and most immortal revenge. Even the quiet and confiding temper of Lucy
herself, swayed by the opinions expressed by all around her, could not
but consider the conduct of Ravenswood as precipitate, and even unkind.
"It was my father," she repeated with a sigh, "who welcomed him to this
place, and encouraged, or at least allowed, the intimacy between us.
Should he not have remembered this, and requited it with at least some
moderate degree of procrastination in the assertion of his own alleged
rights? I would have forfeited for him double the value of these lands,
which he pursues with an ardour that shows he has forgotten how much I
am implicated in the matter."

Lucy, however, could only murmur these things to herself, unwilling to
increase the prejudices against her lover entertained by all around
her, who exclaimed against the steps pursued on his account as illegal,
vexatious, and tyrannical, resembling the worst measures in the worst
times of the worst Stuarts, and a degradation of Scotland, the decisions
of whose learned judges were thus subjected to the review of a court
composed indeed of men of the highest rank, and who were not trained to
the study of any municipal law, and might be supposed specially to hold
in contempt that of Scotland. As a natural consequence of the alleged
injustice meditated towards her father, every means was restored to, and
every argument urged to induce Miss Ashton to break off her engagement
with Ravenswood, as being scandalous, shameful, and sinful, formed with
the mortal enemy of her family, and calculated to add bitterness to the
distress of her parents.

Lucy's spirit, however, was high, and, although unaided and alone,
she could have borne much: she could have endured the repinings of her
father; his murmurs against what he called the tyrannical usage of the
ruling party; his ceaseless charges of ingratitude against Ravenswood;
his endless lectures on the various means by which contracts may be
voided and annulled; his quotations from the civil, municipal, and the
canon law; and his prelections upon the patria potestas.

She might have borne also in patience, or repelled with scorn, the
bitter taunts and occasional violence of her brother, Colonel Douglas
Ashton, and the impertinent and intrusive interference of other friends
and relations. But it was beyond her power effectually to withstand or
elude the constant and unceasing persecution of Lady Ashton, who, laying
every other wish aside, had bent the whol efforts of her powerful
mind to break her daughter's contract with Ravenswood, and to place
a perpetual bar between the lovers, by effecting Lucy's union with
Bucklaw. Far more deeply skilled than her husband in the recesses of the
human heart, she was aware that in this way she might strike a blow of
deep and decisive vengeance upon one whom she esteemed as her mortal
enemy; nor did she hesitate at raising her arm, although she knew that
the wound must be dealt through the bosom of her daughter. With this
stern and fixed purpose, she sounded every deep and shallow of her
daughter's soul, assumed alternately every disguise of manner which
could serve her object, and prepared at leisure every species of dire
machinery by which the human mind can be wrenched from its settled
determination. Some of these were of an obvious description, and require
only to be cursorily mentioned; others were characteristic of the time,
the country, and the persons engaged in this singular drama.

It was of the last consequence that all intercourse betwixt the lovers
should be stopped, and, by dint of gold and authority, Lady Ashton
contrived to possess herself of such a complete command of all who were
placed around her daughter, that, if fact, no leaguered fortress was
ever more completely blockaded; while, at the same time, to all outward
appearance Miss Ashton lay under no restriction. The verge of her
parents' domains became, in respect to her, like the viewless and
enchanted line drawn around a fairy castle, where nothing unpermitted
can either enter from without or escape from within. Thus every letter,
in which Ravenswood conveyed to Lucy Ashton the indispensable reasons
which detained him abroad, and more than one note which poor Lucy had
addressed to him through what she thought a secure channel, fell into
the hands of her mother. It could not be but that the tenor of these
intercepted letters, especially those of Ravenswood, should contain
something to irritate the passions and fortify the obstinacy of her into
whose hands they fell; but Lady Ashton's passions were too deep-rooted
to require this fresh food. She burnt the papers as regularly as she
perused them; and as they consumed into vapour and tinder, regarded them
with a smile upon her compressed lips, and an exultation in her steady
eye, which showed her confidence that the hopes of the writers should
soon be rendered equally unsubstantial.

It usually happens that fortune aids the machinations of those who are
prompt to avail themselves of every chance that offers. A report was
wafted from the continent, founded, like others of the same sort, upon
many plausible circumstances, but without any real basis, stating the
Master of Ravenswood to be on the eve of marriage with a foreign lady
of fortune and distinction. This was greedily caught up by both the
political parties, who were at once struggling for power and for popular
favour, and who seized, as usual, upon the most private circumstances
in the lives of each other's partisans to convert them into subjects of
political discussion.

The Marquis of A---- gave his opinion aloud and publicly, not indeed in
the coarse terms ascribed to him by Captain Craigengelt, but in a manner
sufficiently offensive to the Ashtons. "He thought the report," he said,
"highly probably, and heartily wished it might be true. Such a match
was fitter and far more creditable for a spirited young fellow than a
marriage with the daughter of an old Whig lawyer, whose chicanery had so
nearly ruined his father."

The other party, of course, laying out of view the opposition which the
Master of Ravenswood received from Miss Ashton's family, cried shame
upon his fickleness and perfidy, as if he had seduced the young lady
into an engagement, and wilfully and causelessly abandoned her for
another.

Sufficient care was taken that this report should find its way to
Ravenswood Castle through every various channel, Lady Ashton being
well aware that the very reiteration of the same rumour, from so many
quarters, could not but give it a semblance of truth. By some it was
told as a piece of ordinary news, by some communicated as serious
intelligence; now it was whispered to Lucy Ashton's ear in the tone of
malignant pleasantry, and now transmitted to her as a matter of grave
and serious warning.

Even the boy Henry was made the instrument of adding to his sister's
torments. One morning he rushed into the room with a willow branch in
his hand, which he told her had arrived that instant from Germany for
her special wearing. Lucy, as we have seen, was remarkably fond of
her younger brother, and at that moment his wanton and thoughtless
unkindness seemed more keenly injurious than even the studied insults of
her elder brother. Her grief, however, had no shade of resentment; she
folded her arms about the boy's neck, and saying faintly, "Poor Henry!
you speak but what they tell you" she burst into a flood of unrestrained
tears. The boy was moved, notwithstanding the thoughtlessness of his age
and character. "The devil take me," said he, "Lucy, if I fetch you any
more of these tormenting messages again; for I like you better," said
he, kissing away the tears, "than the whole pack of them; and you shall
have my grey pony to ride on, and you shall canter him if you like--ay,
and ride beyond the village, too, if you have a mind."

"Who told you," said Lucy, "that I am not permitted to ride where I
please?"

"That's a secret," said the boy; "but you will find you can never ride
beyond the village but your horse will cast a shoe, or fall lame, or the
cattle bell will ring, or something will happen to bring you back. But
if I tell you more of these things, Douglas will nto get me the pair of
colours they have promised me, and so good-morrow to you."

This dialogue plunged Lucy in still deeper dejection, as it tended to
show her plainly what she had for some time suspected, that she was
little better than a prisoner at large in her father's house. We have
described her in the outset of our story as of a romantic disposition,
delighting in tales of love and wonder, and readily identifying herself
with the situation of those legendary heroines with whose adventures,
for want of better reading, her memory had become stocked. The fairy
wand, with which in her solitude she had delighted to raise visions of
enchantment, became now the rod of a magician, the bond slave of evil
_genii_, serving only to invoke spectres at which the exorcist trembled.
She felt herself the object of suspicion, of scorn, of dislike at least,
if not of hatred, to her own family; and it seemed to her that she was
abandoned by the very person on whose account she was exposed to
the enmity of all around her. Indeed, the evidence of Ravenswood's
infidelity began to assume every day a more determined character.
A soldier of fortune, of the name of Westenho, an old familiar of
Craigengelt's, chanced to arrive from abroad about this time. The worthy
Captain, though without any precise communication with Lady Ashton,
always acted most regularly and sedulously in support of her plans,
and easily prevailed upon his friend, by dint of exaggeration of real
circumstances and coming of others, to give explicit testimony to the
truth of Ravenswood's approaching marriage.

Thus beset on all hands, and in a manner reduced to despair, Lucy's
temper gave way under the pressure of constant affliction and
persecution. She became gloomy and abstracted, and, contrary to her
natural and ordinary habit of mind, sometimes turned with spirit, and
even fierceness, on those by whom she was long and closely annoyed. Her
health also began to be shaken, and her hectic cheek and wandering
eye gave symptoms of what is called a fever upon the spirits. In most
mothers this would have moved compassion; but Lady Ashton, compact and
firm of purpose, saw these waverings of health and intellect with no
greater sympathy than that with which the hostile engineer regards the
towers of a beleaguered city as they reel under the discharge of his
artillery; or rather, she considered these starts and inequalities of
temper as symptoms of Lucy's expiring resolution; as the angler, by the
throes and convulsive exertions of the fish which he has hooked,
becomes aware that he soon will be able to land him. To accelerate
the catastrophe in the present case, Lady Ashton had recourse to an
expedient very consistent with the temper and credulity of those times,
but which the reader will probably pronounce truly detestable and
diabolical.




CHAPTER XXXI.

     In which a witch did dwell, in loathly weeds,
     And wilful want, all careless of her deeds;
     So choosing solitary to abide,
     Far from all neighbours, that her devilish deeds
     And hellish arts from people she might hide,
     And hurt far off, unknown, whome'er she envied.

     Faerie Queene.

THE health of Lucy Ashton soon required the assistance of a person more
skilful in the office of a sick-nurse than the female domestics of the
family. Ailsie Gourlay, sometimes called the Wise Woman of Bowden, was
the person whom, for her own strong reasons, Lady Ashton selected as an
attendant upon her daughter.

This woman had acquired a considerable reputation among the ignorant by
the pretended cures which she performed, especially in "oncomes," as
the Scotch call them, or mysterious diseases, which baffle the regular
physician. Her pharmacopoeia consisted partly of herbs selected in
planetary hours, partly of words, signs, and charms, which sometimes,
perhaps, produced a favourable influence upon the imagination of her
patients. Such was the avowed profession of Luckie Gourlay, which, as
may well be supposed, was looked upon with a suspicious eye, not only
by her neighbours, but even by the clergy of the district. In
private, however, she traded more deeply in the occult sciences; for,
notwithstanding the dreadful punishments inflicted upon the supposed
crime of witchcraft, there wanted not those who, steeled by want and
bitterness of spirit, were willing to adopt the hateful and dangerous
character, for the sake of the influence which its terrors enabled them
to exercise in the vicinity, and the wretched emolument which they could
extract by the practice of their supposed art.

Ailsie Gourlay was not indeed fool enough to acknowledge a compact with
the Evil One, which would have been a swift and ready road to the stake
and tar-barrel. Her fairy, she said, like Caliban's, was a harmless
fairy. Nevertheless, she "spaed fortunes," read dreams, composed
philtres, discovered stolen goods, and made and dissolved matches as
successfully as if, according to the belief of the whole neighbourhood,
she had been aided in those arts by Beelzebub himself. The worst of the
pretenders to these sciences was, that they were generally persons who,
feeling themselves odious to humanity, were careless of what they did
to deserve the public hatred. Real crimes were often committed under
pretence of magical imposture; and it somewhat relieves the disgust
with which we read, in the criminal records, the conviction of
these wretches, to be aware that many of them merited, as poisoners,
suborners, and diabolical agents in secret domestic crimes, the severe
fate to which they were condemned for the imaginary guilt of witchcraft.

Such was Aislie Gourlay, whom, in order to attain the absolute
subjugation of Lucy Ashton's mind, her mother thought it fitting to
place near her person. A woman of less consequence than Lady Ashton
had not dared to take such a step; but her high rank and strength of
character set her above the censure of the world, and she was allowed to
have selected for her daughter's attendant the best and most experienced
sick-nurse and "mediciner" in the neighbourhood, where an inferior
person would have fallen under the reproach of calling in the assistance
of a partner and ally of the great Enemy of mankind.

The beldam caught her cue readily and by innuendo, without giving
Lady Ashton the pain of distinct explanation. She was in many respects
qualified for the part she played, which indeed could not be efficiently
assumed without some knowledge of the human heart and passions. Dame
Gourlay perceived that Lucy shuddered at her external appearance, which
we have already described when we found her in the death-chamber of
blind Alice; and while internally she hated the poor girl for the
involuntary horror with which she saw she was regarded, she commenced
her operations by endeavouring to efface or overcome those prejudices
which, in her heart, she resented as mortal offences. This was easily
done, for the hag's external ugliness was soon balanced by a show of
kindness and interest, to which Lucy had of late been little accustomed;
her attentive services and real skill gained her the ear, if not the
confidence, of her patient; and under pretence of diverting the solitude
of a sick-room, she soon led her attention captive by the legends in
which she was well skilled, and to which Lucy's habit of reading and
reflection induced her to "lend an attentive ear." Dame Gourlay's tales
were at first of a mild and interesting character--

     Of fays that nightly dance upon the wold,
     And lovers doom'd to wander and to weep,
     And castles high, where wicked wizards keep
     Their captive thralls.

Gradually, however, they assumed a darker and more mysterious character,
and became such as, told by the midnight lamp, and enforced by the
tremulous tone, the quivering and livid lip, the uplifted skinny
forefinger, and the shaking head of the blue-eyed hag, might have
appalled a less credulous imagination in an age more hard of belief. The
old Sycorax saw her advantage, and gradually narrowed her magic circle
around the devoted victim on whose spirit she practised. Her legends
began to relate to the fortunes of the Ravenswood family, whose ancient
grandeur and portentous authority credulity had graced with so many
superstitious attributes. The story of the fatal fountain was narrated
at full length, and with formidable additions, by the ancient sibyl. The
prophecy, quoted by Caleb, concerning the dead bride who was to be won
by the last of the Ravenswoods, had its own mysterious commentary;
and the singular circumstance of the apparition seen by the Master of
Ravenswood in the forest, having partly transpired through his
hasty inquiries in the cottage of Old Alice, formed a theme for many
exaggerations.

Lucy might have despised these tales if they had been related concerning
another family, or if her own situation had been less despondent. But
circumstanced as she was, the idea that an evil fate hung over her
attachment became predominant over her other feelings; and the gloom
of superstition darkened a mind already sufficiently weakened by
sorrow, distress, uncertainty, and an oppressive sense of desertion and
desolation. Stories were told by her attendant so closely resembling her
own in their circumstances, that she was gradually led to converse upon
such tragic and mystical subjects with the beldam, and to repose a sort
of confidence in the sibyl, whom she still regarded with involuntary
shuddering. Dame Gourlay knew how to avail herself of this imperfect
confidence. She directed Lucy's thoughts to the means of inquiring into
futurity--the surest mode perhaps, of shaking the understanding and
destroying the spirits. Omens were expounded, dreams were interpreted,
and other tricks of jugglery perhaps resorted to, by which the pretended
adepts of the period deceived and fascinated their deluded followers. I
find it mentioned in the articles of distay against Ailsie Gourlay--for
it is some comfort to know that the old hag was tried, condemned, and
burned on the top of North Berwick Law, by sentence of a commission
from the privy council--I find, I say, it was charged against her, among
other offences, that she had, by the aid and delusions of Satan, shown
to a young person of quality, in a mirror glass, a gentleman then
abroad, to whom the said young person was betrothed, and who appeared in
the vision to be in the act of bestowing his hand upon another lady. But
this and some other parts of the record appear to have been studiously
left imperfect in names and dates, probably out of regard to the honour
of the families concerned. If Dame Gourlay was able actually to play
off such a piece of jugglery, it is clear she must have had better
assistance to practise the deception than her own skill or funds could
supply. Meanwhile, this mysterious visionary traffic had its usual
effect in unsettling Miss Ashton's mind. Her temper became unequal,
her health decayed daily, her manners grew moping, melancholy,
and uncertain. Her father, guessing partly at the cause of these
appearances, made a point of banishing Dame Gourlay from the castle;
but the arrow was shot, and was rankling barb-deep in the side of the
wounded deer.

It was shortly after the departure of this woman, that Lucy Ashton,
urged by her parents, announced to them, with a vivacity by which they
were startled, "That she was conscious heaven and earth and hell had set
themselves against her union with Ravenswood; still her contract," she
said, "was a binding contract, and she neither would nor could resign
it without the consent of Ravenswood. Let me be assured," she concluded,
"that he will free me from my engagement, and dispose of me as you
please, I care not how. When the diamonds are gone, what signifies the
casket?"

The tone of obstinacy with which this was said, her eyes flashing
with unnatural light, and her hands firmly clenched, precluded the
possibility of dispute; and the utmost length which Lady Ashton's art
could attain, only got her the privilege of dictating the letter, by
which her daughter required to know of Ravenswood whether he intended to
abide by or to surrender what she termed "their unfortunate engagement."
Of this advantage Lady Ashton so far and so ingeniously availed herself
that, according to the wording of the letter, the reader would have
supposed Lucy was calling upon her lover to renounce a contract which
was contrary to the interests and inclinations of both. Not trusting
even to this point of deception, Lady Ashton finally determined to
suppress the letter altogether, in hopes that Lucy's impatience would
induce her to condemn Ravenswood unheard and in absence. In this she was
disappointed. The time, indeed, had long elapsed when an answer should
have been received from the continent. The faint ray of hope which still
glimmered in Lucy's mind was well nigh extinguished. But the idea never
forsook her that her letter might not have been duly forwarded. One of
her mother's new machinations unexpectedly furnished her with the means
of ascertaining what she most desired to know.

The female agent of hell having been dismissed from the castle, Lady
Ashton, who wrought by all variety of means, resolved to employ, for
working the same end on Lucy's mind, an agent of a very different
character. This was no other than the Reverent Mr. Bide-the-Bent, a
presbyterian clergyman, formerly mentioned, of the very strictest
order and the most rigid orthodoxy, whose aid she called in, upon the
principle of the tyrant in the in the tragedy:

     I'll have a priest shall preach her from her faith,
     And make it sin not to renounce that vow
     Which I'd have broken.

But Lady Ashton was mistaken in the agent she had selected. His
prejudices, indeed, were easily enlisted on her side, and it was no
difficult matter to make him regard with horror the prospect of a union
betwixt the daughter of a God-fearing, professing, and Presbyterian
family of distinction and the heir of a bloodthirsty prelatist and
persecutor, the hands of whose fathers had been dyed to the wrists in
the blood of God's saints. This resembled, in the divine's opinion, the
union of a Moabitish stranger with a daughter of Zion. But with all
the more severe prejudices and principles of his sect, Bide-the-Bent
possessed a sound judgment, and had learnt sympathy even in that very
school of persecution where the heart is so frequently hardened. In a
private interview with Miss Ashton, he was deeply moved by her distress,
and could not but admit the justice of her request to be permitted a
direct communication with Ravenswood upon the subject of their solemn
contract. When she urged to him the great uncertainty under which she
laboured whether her letter had been ever forwarded, the old man paced
the room with long steps, shook his grey head, rested repeatedly for a
space on his ivory-headed staff, and, after much hesitation, confessed
that he thought her doubts so reasonable that he would himself aid in
the removal of them.

"I cannot but opine, Miss Lucy," he said, "that your worshipful lady
mother hath in this matter an eagerness whilk, although it ariseth
doubtless from love to your best interests here and hereafter, for the
man is of persecuting blood, and himself a persecutor, a Cavalier
or Malignant, and a scoffer, who hath no inheritance in Jesse;
nevertheless, we are commanded to do justice unto all, and to fulfil
our bond and covenant, as well to the stranger as to him who is in
brotherhood with us. Wherefore myself, even I myself, will be aiding
unto the delivery of your letter to the man Edgar Ravenswood, trusting
that the issue thereof may be your deliverance from the nets in which he
hath sinfully engaged you. And that I may do in this neither more nor
less than hath been warranted by your honourable parents, I pray you
to transcribe, without increment or subtraction, the letter formerly
expeded under the dictation of your right honourable mother; and I shall
put it into such sure course of being delivered, that if, honourable
young madam, you shall receive no answer, it will be necessary that
you conclude that the man meaneth in silence to abandon that naughty
contract, which, peradventure, he may be unwilling directly to restore."

Lucy eagerly embraced the expedient of the worthy divine. A new letter
was written in the precise terms of the former, and consigned by Mr.
Bide-the-Bent to the charge of Saunders Moonshine, a zealous elder of
the church when on shore, and when on board his brig as bold a smuggler
as ever ran out a sliding bowsprit to the winds that blow betwixt
Campvere and the east coast of Scotland. At the recommendation of his
pastor, Saunders readily undertook that the letter should be securely
conveyed to the Master of Ravenswood at the court where he now resided.

This retrospect became necessary to explain the conference betwixt Miss
Ashton, her mother, and Bucklaw which we have detailed in a preceding
chapter.

Lucy was now like the sailor who, while drifting through a tempestuous
ocean, clings for safety to a single plank, his powers of grasping it
becoming every moment more feeble, and the deep darkness of the night
only checkered by the flashes of lightning, hissing as they show the
white tops of the billows, in which he is soon to be engulfed.

Week crept away after week, and day after day. St. Jude's day arrived,
the last and protracted term to which Lucy had limited herself, and
there was neither letter nor news of Ravenswood.




CHAPTER XXXII.

     How fair these names, how much unlike they look
     To all the blurr'd subscriptions in my book!
     The bridegroom's letters stand in row above,
     Tapering, yet straight, like pine-trees in his grove;
     While free and fine the bride's appear below,
     As light and slender as her jessamines grow.

     CRABBE.

ST. JUDE's day came, the term assigned by Lucy herself as the furthest
date of expectation, and, as we have already said, there were neither
letters from nor news of Ravenswood. But there were news of Bucklaw, and
of his trusty associate Craigengelt, who arrived early in the morning
for the completion of the proposed espousals, and for signing the
necessary deeds.

These had been carefully prepared under the revisal of Sir William
Ashton himself, it having been resolved, on account of the state of Miss
Ashton's health, as it was said, that none save the parties immediately
interested should be present when the parchments were subscribed. It
was further determined that the marriage should be solemnised upon the
fourth day after signing the articles, a measure adopted by Lady Ashton,
in order that Lucy might have as little time as possible to recede or
relapse into intractability. There was no appearance, however, of
her doing either. She heard the proposed arrangement with the calm
indifference of despair, or rather with an apathy arising from the
oppressed and stupified state of her feelings. To an eye so unobserving
as that of Bucklaw, her demeanour had little more of reluctance than
might suit the character of a bashful young lady, who, however, he could
not disguise from himself, was complying with the choice of her friends
rather than exercising any personal predilection in his favour.

When the morning compliment of the bridegroom had been paid, Miss Ashton
was left for some time to herself; her mother remarking, that the deeds
must be signed before the hour of noon, in order that the marriage might
be happy. Lucy suffered herself to be attired for the occasion as the
taste of her attendants suggested, and was of course splendidly arrayed.
Her dress was composed of white satin and Brussels lace, and her
hair arranged with a profusion of jewels, whose lustre made a strange
contrast to the deadly paleness of her complexion, and to the trouble
which dwelt in her unsettled eye.

Her toilette was hardly finished ere Henry appeared, to conduct the
passive bride to the state apartment, where all was prepared for signing
the contract. "Do you know, sister," he said, "I am glad you are to
have Bucklaw after all, instead of Ravenswood, who looked like a Spanish
grandee come to cut our throats and trample our bodies under foot.
And I am glad the broad seas are between us this day, for I shall never
forget how frightened I was when I took him for the picture of old Sir
Malise walked out of the canvas. Tell me true, are you not glad to be
fairly shot of him?"

"Ask me no questions, dear Henry," said his unfortunate sister; "there
is little more can happen to make me either glad or sorry in this
world."

"And that's what all young brides say," said Henry; "and so do not be
cast down, Lucy, for you'll tell another tale a twelvemonth hence; and I
am to be bride's-man, and ride before you to the kirk; and all our kith,
kin, and allies, and all Bucklaw's, are to be mounted and in order; and
I am to have a scarlet laced coat, and a feathered hat, and a sword-belt,
double bordered with gold, and point d'Espagne, and a dagger instead of
a sword; and I should like a sword much better, but my father won't
hear of it. All my things, and a hundred besides, are to come out from
Edinburgh to-night with old Gilbert and the sumpter mules; and I will
bring them and show them to you the instant they come."

The boy's chatter was here interrupted by the arrival of Lady Ashton,
somewhat alarmed at her daughter's stay. With one of her sweetest
smiles, she took Lucy's arm under her own.

There were only present, Sir William Ashton and Colonel Douglas Ashton,
the last in full regimentals; Bucklaw, in bridegroom trim; Craigengelt,
freshly equipt from top to toe by the bounty of his patron, and
bedizened with as much lace as might have become the dress of the Copper
Captain; together with the Rev. Mr. Bide-the-Bent; the presence of
a minister being, in strict Presbyterian families, an indispensable
requisite upon all occasions of unusual solemnity.

Wines and refreshments were placed on a table, on which the writings
were displayed, ready for signature.

But before proceeding either to business or refreshment, Mr.
Bide-the-Bent, at a signal from Sir William Ashton, invited the company
to join him in a short extemporary prayer, in which he implored a
blessing upon the contract now to be solemnised between the honourable
parties then present. With the simplicity of his times and profession,
which permitted strong personal allusions, he petitioned that the
wounded mind of one of these noble parties might be healed, in reward
of her compliance with the advice of her right honourable parents; and
that, as she had proved herself a child after God's commandment, by
honouring her father and mother, she and hers might enjoy the promised
blessing--length of days in the land here, and a happy portion hereafter
in a better country. He prayed farther, that the bridegroom might
be weaned from those follies which seduced youth from the path of
knowledge; that he might cease to take delight in vain and unprofitable
company, scoffers, rioters, and those who sit late at the wine (here
Bucklaw winked at Craigengelt), and cease from the society that causeth
to err. A suitable supplication in behalf of Sir William and Lady Ashton
and their family concluded this religious address, which thus embraced
every individual present excepting Craigengelt, whom the worthy divine
probably considered as past all hopes of grace.

The business of the day now went forward: Sir William Ashton signed
the contract with legal solemnity and precision; his son, with military
nonchalance; and Bucklaw, having subscribed as rapidly as Craigengelt
could manage to turn the leaves, concluded by wiping his pen on that
worthy's new laced cravat. It was now Miss Ashton's turn to sign the
writings, and she was guided by her watchful mother to the table for
that purpose. At her first attempt, she began to write with a dry pen,
and when the circumstance was pointed out, seemed unable, after several
attempts, to dip it in the massive silver ink-standish, which stood full
before her. Lady Ashton's vigilance hastened to supply the deficiency. I
have myself seen the fatal deed, and in the distinct characters in which
the name of Lucy Ashton is traced on each page there is only a very
slight tremulous irregularity, indicative of her state of mind at the
time of the subscription. But the last signature is incomplete, defaced,
and blotted; for, while her hand was employed in tracing it, the hasty
tramp of a horse was heard at the gate, succeeded by a step in the
outer gallery, and a voice which, in a commanding tone, bore down the
opposition of the menials. The pen dropped from Lucy's fingers, as she
exclaimed with a faint shriek: "He is come--he is come!"




CHAPTER XXXIII.

     This by his tongue should be a Montague!
     Fetch me my rapier, boy;
     Now, by the faith and honour of my kin,
     To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.

     Romeo and Juliet.

HARDLY had Miss Ashton dropped the pen, when the door of the apartment
flew open, and the Master of Ravenswood entered the apartment.

Lockhard and another domestic, who had in vain attempted to oppose his
passage through the gallery or antechamber, were seen standing on the
threshold transfixed with surprise, which was instantly communicated to
the whole party in the state-room. That of Colonel Douglas Ashton was
mingled with resentment; that of Bucklaw with haughty and affected
indifference; the rest, even Lady Ashton herself, showed signs of
fear; and Lucy seemed stiffened to stone by this unexpected apparition.
Apparition it might well be termed, for Ravenswood had more the
appearance of one returned from the dead than of a living visitor.

He planted himself full in the middle of the apartment, opposite to the
table at which Lucy was seated, on whom, as if she had been alone in the
chamber, he bent his eyes with a mingled expression of deep grief and
deliberate indignation. His dark-coloured riding cloak, displaced from
one shoulder, hung around one side of his person in the ample folds of
the Spanish mantle. The rest of his rich dress was travel-soiled, and
deranged by hard riding. He had a sword by his side, and pistols in his
belt. His slouched hat, which he had not removed at entrance, gave
an additional gloom to his dark features, which, wasted by sorrow and
marked by the ghastly look communicated by long illness, added to a
countenance naturally somewhat stern and wild a fierce and even savage
expression. The matted and dishevelled locks of hair which escaped from
under his hat, together with his fixed and unmoved posture, made his
head more resemble that of a marble bust than that of a living man. He
said not a single word, and there was a deep silence in the company for
more than two minutes.

It was broken by Lady Ashton, who in that space partly recovered her
natural audacity. She demanded to know the cause of this unauthorised
intrusion.

"That is a question, madam," said her son, "which I have the best right
to ask; and I must request of the Master of Ravenswood to follow me
where he can answer it at leisure."

Bucklaw interposed, saying, "No man on earth should usurp his previous
right in demanding an explanation from the Master. Craigengelt," he
added, in an undertone, "d--n ye, why do you stand staring as if you saw
a ghost? fetch me my sword from the gallery."

"I will relinquish to none," said Colonel Ashton, "my right of calling
to account the man who has offered this unparalleled affront to my
family." "Be patient, gentlemen," said Ravenswood, turning sternly
towards them, and waving his hand as if to impose silence on their
altercation. "If you are as weary of your lives as I am, I will find
time and place to pledge mine against one or both; at present, I have no
leisure for the disputes of triflers."

"Triflers!" echoed Colonel Ashton, half unsheathing his sword, while
Bucklaw laid his hand on the hilt of that which Craigengelt had just
reached him.

Sir William Ashton, alarmed for his son's safety, rushed between the
young men and Ravenswood, exclaiming: "My son, I command you--Bucklaw, I
entreat you--keep the peace, in the name of the Queen and of the law!"

"In the name of the law of God," said Bide-the-Bent, advancing also with
uplifted hands between Bucklaw, the Colonel, and the object of their
resentment--"in the name of Him who brought peace on earth and good-will
to mankind, I implore--I beseech--I command you to forbear violence
towards each other! God hateth the bloodthirsty man; he who striketh
with the sword shall perish with the sword."

"Do you take me for a dog, sir" said Colonel Ashton, turning fiercely
upon him, "or something more brutally stupid, to endure this insult in
my father's house? Let me go, Bucklaw! He shall account to me, or, by
Heavens, I will stab him where he stands!"

"You shall not touch him here," said Bucklaw; "he once gave me my
life, and were he the devil come to fly away with the whole house and
generation, he shall have nothing but fair play."

The passions of the two young men thus counteracting each other
gave Ravenswood leisure to exclaim, in a stern and steady voice:
"Silence!--let him who really seeks danger take the fitting time when
it is to be found; my mission here will be shortly accomplished. Is THAT
your handwriting, madam?" he added in a softer tone, extending towards
Miss Ashton her last letter.

A faltering "Yes" seemed rather to escape from her lips than to be
uttered as a voluntary answer.

"And is THIS also your handwriting?" extending towards her the mutual
engagement.

Lucy remained silent. Terror, and a yet stronger and more confused
feeling, so utterly disturbed her understanding that she probably
scarcely comprehended the question that was put to her.

"If you design," said Sir William Ashton, "to found any legal claim on
that paper, sir, do not expect to receive any answer to an extrajudicial
question."

"Sir William Ashton," said Ravenswood, "I pray you, and all who hear
me, that you will not mistake my purpose. If this young lady, of her own
free will, desires the restoration of this contract, as her letter
would seem to imply, there is not a withered leaf which this autumn wind
strews on the heath that is more valueless in my eyes. But I must and
will hear the truth from her own mouth; without this satisfaction I will
not leave this spot. Murder me by numbers you possibly may; but I am
an armed man--I am a desperate man, and I will not die without ample
vengeance. This is my resolution, take it as you may. I WILL hear her
determination from her own mouth; from her own mouth, alone, and without
witnesses, will I hear it. Now, choose," he said, drawing his sword with
the right hand, and, with the left, by the same motion taking a pistol
from his belt and cocking it, but turning the point of one weapon and
the muzzle of the other to the ground--"choose if you will have this
hall floated with blood, or if you will grant me the decisive interview
with my affianced bride which the laws of God and the country alike
entitle me to demand."

All recoiled at the sound of his voice and the determined action by
which it was accompanied; for the ecstasy of real desperation seldom
fails to overpower the less energetic passions by which it may be
opposed. The clergyman was the first to speak. "In the name of God," he
said, "receive an overture of peace from the meanest of His servants.
What this honourable person demands, albeit it is urged with over
violence, hath yet in it something of reason. Let him hear from Miss
Lucy's own lips that she hath dutifully acceded to the will of her
parents, and repenteth her of her covenant with him; and when he is
assured of this he will depart in peace unto his own dwelling, and
cumber us no more. Alas! the workings of the ancient Adam are strong
even in the regenerate; surely we should have long-suffering with those
who, being yet in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, are swept
forward by the uncontrollable current of worldly passion. Let then, the
Master of Ravenswood have the interview on which he insisteth; it can
but be as a passing pang to this honourable maiden, since her faith is
now irrevocably pledged to the choice of her parents. Let it, I say, be
this: it belongeth to my functions to entreat your honours' compliance
with this headling overture."

"Never!" answered Lady Ashton, whose rage had now overcome her first
surprise and terror--"never shall this man speak in private with my
daughter, the affianced bride of another! pass from this room who will,
I remain here. I fear neither his violence nor his weapons, though some,"
she said, glancing a look towards Colonel Ashton, "who bear my name
appear more moved by them."

"For God's sake, madam," answered the worthy divine, "add not fuel to
firebrands. The Master of Ravenswood cannot, I am sure, object to your
presence, the young lady's state of health being considered, and your
maternal duty. I myself will also tarry; peradventure my grey hairs may
turn away wrath."

"You are welcome to do so, sir," said Ravenswood; "and Lady Ashton is
also welcome to remain, if she shall think proper; but let all others
depart."

"Ravenswood," said Colonel Ashton, crossing him as he went out, "you
shall account for this ere long."

"When you please," replied Ravenswood.

"But I," said Bucklaw, with a half smile, "have a prior demand on your
leisure, a claim of some standing."

"Arrange it as you will," said Ravenswood; "leave me but this day in
peace, and I will have no dearer employment on earth to-morrow than to
give you all the satisfaction you can desire."

The other gentlemen left the apartment; but Sir William Ashton lingered.

"Master of Ravenswood," he said, in a conciliating tone, "I think I have
not deserved that you should make this scandal and outrage in my family.
If you will sheathe your sword, and retire with me into my study, I will
prove to you, by the most satisfactory arguments, the inutility of your
present irregular procedure----"

"To-morrow, sir--to-morrow--to-morrow, I will hear you at length,"
reiterated Ravenswood, interrupting him; "this day hath its own sacred
and indispensable business."

He pointed to the door, and Sir William left the apartment.

Ravenswood sheathed his sword, uncocked and returned his pistol to his
belt; walked deliberately to the door of the apartment, which he bolted;
returned, raised his hat from his forehead, and gazing upon Lucy with
eyes in which an expression of sorrow overcame their late fierceness,
spread his dishevelled locks back from his face, and said, "Do you know
me, Miss Ashton? I am still Edgar Ravenswood." She was silent, and he
went on with increasing vehemence: "I am still that Edgar Ravenswood
who, for your affection, renounced the dear ties by which injured honour
bound him to seek vengeance. I am that Ravenswood who, for your sake,
forgave, nay, clasped hands in friendship with, the oppressor and
pillager of his house, the traducer and murderer of his father."

"My daughter," answered Lady Ashton, interrupting him, "has no occasion
to dispute the identity of your person; the venom of your present
language is sufficient to remind her that she speaks with the mortal
enemy of her father."

"I pray you to be patient, madam," answered Ravenswood; "my answer
must come from her own lips. Once more, Miss Lucy Ashton, I am that
Ravenswood to whom you granted the solemn engagement which you now
desire to retract and cancel."

Lucy's bloodless lips could only falter out the words, "It was my
mother."

"She speaks truly," said Lady Ashton, "it WAS I who, authorised alike
by the laws of God and man, advised her, and concurred with her, to
set aside an unhappy and precipitate engagement, and to annul it by the
authority of Scripture itself."

"Scripture!" said Ravenswood, scornfully.

"Let him hear the text," said Lady Ashton, appealing to the divine, "on
which you yourself, with cautious reluctance, declared the nullity of
the pretended engagement insisted upon by this violent man."

The clergyman took his clasped Bible from his pocket, and read the
following words: "If a woman vow a vow unto the Lord, and bind herself
by a bond, being in her father's house in her youth, and her father hear
her vow, and her bond wherewith she hath bound her soul, and her father
shall hold his peace at her; then all her vows shall stand, and every
vow wherewith she hath bound her soul shall stand."

"And was it not even so with us?" interrrupted Ravenswood.

"Control thy impatience, young man," answered the divine, "and hear what
follows in the sacred text: 'But if her father disallow her in the day
that he heareth, not any of her vows, or of her bonds wherewith she hath
bound her soul, shall stand; and the Lord shall forgive her, because her
father disallowed her."

"And was not," said Lady Ashton, fiercely and triumphantly breaking
in--"was not ours the case stated in the Holy Writ? Will this person
deny, that the instant her parents heard of the vow, or bond, by which
our daughter had bound her soul, we disallowed the same in the most
express terms, and informed him by writing of our determination?"

"And is this all?" said Ravenswood, looking at Lucy. "Are you willing
to barter sworn faith, the exercise of free will, and the feelings of
mutual affection to this wretched hypocritical sophistry?"

"Hear him!" said Lady Ashton, looking to the clergyman--"hear the
blasphemer!"

"May God forgive him," said Bide-the-Bent, "and enlighten his
ignorance!"

"Hear what I have sacrificed for you," said Ravenswood, still addressing
Lucy, "ere you sanction what has been done in your name. The honour of
an ancient family, the urgent advice of my best friends, have been in
vain used to sway my resolution; neither the arguments of reason nor
the portents of superstition have shaken my fidelity. The very dead have
arisen to warn me, and their warning has been despised. Are you prepared
to pierce my heart for its fidelity with the very weapon which my rash
confidence entrusted to your grasp?"

"Master of Ravenswood," said Lady Ashton, "you have asked what questions
you thought fit. You see the total incapacity of my daughter to answer
you. But I will reply for her, and in a manner which you cannot dispute.
You desire to know whether Lucy Ashton, of her own free will, desires
to annul the engagement into which she has been trepanned. You have her
letter under her own hand, demanding the surrender of it; and, in yet
more full evidence of her purpose, here is the contract which she has
this morning subscribed, in presence of this reverence gentleman, with
Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw."

Ravenswood gazed upon the deed as if petrified. "And it was without
fraud or compulsion," said he, looking towards the clergyman, "that Miss
Ashton subscribed this parchment?"

"I couch it upon my sacred character."

"This is indeed, madam, an undeniable piece of evidence," said
Ravenswood, sternly; "and it will be equally unnecessary and
dishonourable to waste another word in useless remonstrance or reproach.
There, madam," he said, laying down before Lucy the signed paper and the
broken piece of gold--"there are the evidences of your first engagement;
may you be more faithful to that which you have just formed. I will
trouble you to return the corresponding tokens of my ill-placed
confidence; I ought rather to say, of my egregious folly."

Lucy returned the scornful glance of her lover with a gaze from which
perception seemed to have been banished; yet she seemed partly to have
understood his meaning, for she raised her hands as if to undo a blue
ribbon which she wore around her neck. She was unable to accomplish her
purpose, but Lady Ashton cut the ribbon asunder, and detached the broken
piece of gold, which Miss Ashton had till then worn concealed in her
bosom; the written counterpart of the lovers' engagement she for
some time had had in her own possession. With a haughty courtesy, she
delivered both to Ravenswood, who was much softened when he took the
piece of gold.

"And she could wear it thus," he said, speaking to himself--"could wear
it in her very bosom--could wear it next to her heart--even when---- But
complain avails not," he said, dashing from his eye the tear which
had gathered in it, and resuming the stern composure of his manner. He
strode to the chimney, and threw into the fire the paper and piece of
gold, stamping upon the coals with the heel of his boot, as if to ensure
their destruction. "I will be no longer," he then said, "an intruder
here. Your evil wishes, and your worse offices, Lady Ashton, I will
only return by hoping these will be your last machinations against your
daughter's honour and happiness. And to you, madam," he said, addressing
Lucy, "I have nothing farther to say, except to pray to God that you
may not become a world's wonder for this act of wilful and deliberate
perjury." Having uttered these words, he turned on his heel and left the
apartment.

Sir William Ashton, by entreaty and authority, had detained his son and
Bucklaw in a distant part of the castle, in order to prevent their
again meeting with Ravenswood; but as the Master descended the great
staircase, Lockhard delivered him a billet, signed "Sholto Douglas
Ashton," requesting to know where the Master of Ravenswood would be
heard of four or five days from hence, as the writer had business of
weight to settle with him, so soon as an important family event had
taken place.

"Tell Colonel Ashton," said Ravenswood, composedly, "I shall be found at
Wolf's Crag when his leisure serves him."

As he descended the outward stair which led from the terrace, he was
a second time interrupted by Craigengelt, who, on the part of his
principal, the Laird of Bucklaw, expressed a hope that Ravenswood would
not leave Scotland within ten days at least, as he had both former and
recent civilities for which to express his gratitude.

"Tell your master," said Ravenswood, fiercely, "to choose his own time.
He will find me at Wolf's Crag, if his purpose is not forestalled."

"MY master!" replied Craigengelt, encouraged by seeing Colonel Ashton
and Bucklaw at the bottom of the terrace. "Give me leave to say I know
of no such person upon earth, nor will I permit such language to be used
to me!"

"Seek your master, then, in hell!" exclaimed Ravenswood, giving way to
the passion he had hitherto restrained, and throwing Craigengelt from
him with such violence that he rolled down the steps and lay senseless
at the foot of them. "I am a fool," he instantly added, "to vent my
passion upon a caitiff so worthless."

He then mounted his horse, which at his arrival he had secured to a
balustrade in front of the castle, rode very slowly past Bucklaw and
Colonel Ashton, raising his hat as he passed each, and looking in their
faces steadily while he offered this mute salutation, which was returned
by both with the same stern gravity. Ravenswood walked on with equal
deliberation until he reached the head of the avenue, as if to show
that he rather courted than avoided interruption. When he had passed the
upper gate, he turned his horse, and looked at the castle with a fixed
eye; then set spurs to his good steed, and departed with the speed of a
demon dismissed by the exorcist.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

     Who comes from the bridal chamber?
     It is Azrael, the angel of death.

     Thalaba.

AFTER the dreadful scene that had taken place at the castle, Lucy was
transported to her own chamber, where she remained for some time in a
state of absolute stupor. Yet afterwards, in the course of the
ensuing day, she seemed to have recovered, not merely her spirits
and resolution, but a sort of flighty levity, that was foreign to her
character and situation, and which was at times chequered by fits of
deep silence and melancholy and of capricious pettishness. Lady Ashton
became much alarmed and consulted the family physicians. But as her
pulse indicated no change, they could only say that the disease was on
the spirits, and recommended gentle exercise and amusement. Miss Ashton
never alluded to what had passed in the state-room. It seemed doubtful
even if she was conscious of it, for she was often observed to raise
her hands to her neck, as if in search of the ribbon that had been taken
from it, and mutter, in surprise and discontent, when she could not find
it, "It was the link that bound me to life."

Notwithstanding all these remarkable symptoms, Lady Ashton was too
deeply pledged to delay her daughter's marriage even in her present
state of health. It cost her much trouble to keep up the fair side of
appearances towards Bucklaw. She was well aware, that if he once saw any
reluctance on her daughter's part, he would break off the treaty, to her
great personal shame and dishonour. She therefore resolved that, if Lucy
continued passive, the marriage should take place upon the day that had
been previously fixed, trusting that a change of place, of situation,
and of character would operate a more speedy and effectual cure upon
the unsettled spirits of her daughter than could be attained by the slow
measures which the medical men recommended. Sir William Ashton's views
of family aggrandisement, and his desire to strengthen himself against
the measures of the Marquis of A----, readily induced him to acquiesce
in what he could not have perhaps resisted if willing to do so. As for
the young men, Bucklaw and Colonel Ashton, they protested that, after
what had happened, it would be most dishonourable to postpone for
a single hour the time appointed for the marriage, as it would be
generally ascribed to their being intimidated by the intrusive visit and
threats of Ravenswood.

Bucklaw would indeed have been incapable of such precipitation, had he
been aware of the state of Miss Ashton's health, or rather of her mind.
But custom, upon these occasions, permitted only brief and sparing
intercourse between the bridegroom and the betrothed; a circumstance so
well improved by Lady Ashton, that Bucklaw neither saw nor suspected the
real state of the health and feelings of his unhappy bride.

On the eve of the bridal day, Lucy appeared to have one of her fits
of levity, and surveyed with a degree of girlish interest the various
preparations of dress, etc., etc., which the different members of the
family had prepared for the occasion.

The morning dawned bright and cheerily. The bridal guests assembled
in gallant troops from distant quarters. Not only the relations of Sir
William Ashton, and the still more dignified connexions of his lady,
together with the numerous kinsmen and allies of the bridegroom, were
present upon this joyful ceremony, gallantly mounted, arrayed, and
caparisoned, but almost every Presbyterian family of distinction within
fifty miles made a point of attendance upon an occasion which was
considered as giving a sort of triumph over the Marquis of A----, in the
person of his kinsman. Splendid refreshments awaited the guests on their
arrival, and after these were finished, the cry was "To horse." The
bride was led forth betwixt her brother Henry and her mother. Her
gaiety of the preceding day had given rise [place] to a deep shade of
melancholy, which, however, did not misbecome an occasion so momentous.
There was a light in her eyes and a colour in her cheek which had not
been kindled for many a day, and which, joined to her great beauty, and
the splendour of her dress, occasioned her entrance to be greeted with
an universal murmur of applause, in which even the ladies could not
refrain from joining. While the cavalcade were getting to horse, Sir
William Ashton, a man of peace and of form, censured his son Henry for
having begirt himself with a military sword of preposterous length,
belonging to his brother, Colonel Ashton.

"If you must have a weapon," he said, "upon such a peaceful occasion,
why did you not use the short poniard sent from Edinburgh on purpose?"

The boy vindicated himself by saying it was lost.

"You put it out of the way yourself, I suppose," said his father, "out
of ambition to wear that preposterous thing, which might have served Sir
William Wallace. But never mind, get to horse now, and take care of your
sister."

The boy did so, and was placed in the centre of the gallant train. At
the time, he was too full of his own appearance, his sword, his laced
cloak, his feathered hat, and his managed horse, to pay much regard to
anything else; but he afterwards remembered to the hour of his death,
that when the hand of his sister, by which she supported herself on
the pillion behind him, touched his own, it felt as wet and cold as
sepulchral marble.

Glancing wide over hill and dale, the fair bridal procession at last
reached the parish church, which they nearly filled; for, besides
domestics, above a hundred gentlemen and ladies were present upon the
occasion. The marriage ceremony was performed according to the rites
of the Presbyterian persuasion, to which Bucklaw of late had judged it
proper to conform.

On the outside of the church, a liberal dole was distributed to the poor
of the neighbouring parishes, under the direction of Johnie Mortheuch
[Mortsheugh], who had lately been promoted from his desolate quarters
at the Hermitage to fill the more eligible situation of sexton at
the parish church of Ravenswood. Dame Gourlay, with two of her
contemporaries, the same who assisted at Alice's late-wake, seated apart
upon a flat monument, or "through-stane," sate enviously comparing the
shares which had been allotted to them in dividing the dole.

"Johnie Mortheuch," said Annie Winnie, "might hae minded auld lang syne,
and thought of his auld kimmers, for as braw as he is with his new black
coat. I hae gotten but five herring instead o' sax, and this disna look
like a gude saxpennys, and I dare say this bit morsel o' beef is an unce
lighter than ony that's been dealt round; and it's a bit o' the tenony
hough, mair by token that yours, Maggie, is out o' the back-sey."

"Mine, quo' she!" mumbled the paralytic hag--"mine is half banes,
I trow. If grit folk gie poor bodies ony thing for coming to their
weddings and burials, it suld be something that wad do them gude, I
think."

"Their gifts," said Ailsie Gourlay, "are dealt for nae love of us, nor
out of respect for whether we feed or starve. They wad gie us whinstanes
for loaves, if it would serve their ain vanity, and yet they expect us
to be as gratefu', as they ca' it, as if they served us for true love
and liking."

"And that's truly said," answered her companion.

"But, Aislie Gourlay, ye're the auldest o' us three--did ye ever see a
mair grand bridal?"

"I winna say that I have," answered the hag; "but I think soon to see as
braw a burial."

"And that wad please me as weel," said Annie Winnie; "for there's
as large a dole, and folk are no obliged to girn and laugh, and mak
murgeons, and wish joy to these hellicat quality, that lord it ower us
like brute beasts. I like to pack the dead-dole in my lap and rin ower
my auld rhyme--

     My loaf in my lap, my penny in my purse,
     Thou art ne'er the better, and
     I'm ne'er the worse."

"That's right, Annie," said the paralytic woman; "God send us a green
Yule and a fat kirkyard!"

"But I wad like to ken, Luckie Gourlay, for ye're the auldest and wisest
amang us, whilk o' these revellers' turn it will be to be streikit
first?"

"D'ye see yon dandilly maiden," said Dame Gourlay, "a' glistenin' wi'
gowd and jewels, that they are lifting up on the white horse behind that
hare-brained callant in scarlet, wi' the lang sword at his side?"

"But that's the bride!" said her companion, her cold heart touched with
some sort of compassion--"that's the very bride hersell! Eh, whow! sae
young, sae braw, and sae bonny--and is her time sae short?"

"I tell ye," said the sibyl, "her winding sheet is up as high as her
throat already, believe it wha list. Her sand has but few grains to rin
out; and nae wonder--they've been weel shaken. The leaves are withering
fast on the trees, but she'll never see the Martinmas wind gar them
dance in swirls like the fairy rings." "Ye waited on her for a
quarter," said the paralytic woman, "and got twa red pieces, or I am far
beguiled?"

"Ay, ay," answered Ailsie, with a bitter grin; "and Sir William Ashton
promised me a bonny red gown to the boot o' that--a stake, and a chain,
and a tar-barrel, lass! what think ye o' that for a propine?--for being
up early and doun late for fourscore nights and mair wi' his dwining
daughter. But he may keep it for his ain leddy, cummers."

"I hae heard a sough," said Annie Winnie, "as if Leddy Ashton was nae
canny body."

"D'ye see her yonder," said Dame Gourlay, "as she prances on her grey
gelding out at the kirkyard? There's mair o' utter deevilry in that
woman, as brave and fair-fashioned as she rides yonder, than in a' the
Scotch withces that ever flew by moonlight ower North Berwick Law."

"What's that ye say about witches, ye damned hags?" said Johnie
Mortheuch [Mortsheugh]; "are ye casting yer cantrips in the very
kirkyard, to mischieve the bride and bridegroom? Get awa' hame, for if I
tak my souple t'ye, I'll gar ye find the road faster than ye wad like."

"Hegh, sirs!" answered Ailsie Gourlay; "how bra' are we wi' our new
black coat and our weel-pouthered head, as if we had never kenn'd hunger
nor thirst oursells! and we'll be screwing up our bit fiddle, doubtless,
in the ha' the night, amang a' the other elbo'-jiggers for miles round.
Let's see if the pins haud, Johnie--that's a', lad."

"I take ye a' to witness, gude people," said Morheuch, "that she
threatens me wi' mischief, and forespeaks me. If ony thing but gude
happens to me or my fiddle this night, I'll make it the blackest night's
job she ever stirred in. I'll hae her before presbytery and synod: I'm
half a minister mysell, now that I'm a bedral in an inhabited parish."

Although the mutual hatred betwixt these hags and the rest of mankind
had steeled their hearts against all impressions of festivity, this was
by no means the case with the multitude at large. The splendour of the
bridal retinue, the gay dresses, the spirited horses, the blythesome
appearance of the handsome women and gallant gentlemen assembled upon
the occasion, had the usual effect upon the minds of the populace.
The repeated shouts of "Ashton and Bucklaw for ever!" the discharge of
pistols, guns, and musketoons, to give what was called the bridal shot,
evinced the interest the people took in the occasion of the cavalcade,
as they accompanied it upon their return to the castle. If there was
here and there an elder peasant or his wife who sneered at the pomp
of the upstart family, and remembered the days of the long-descended
Ravenswoods, even they, attracted by the plentiful cheer which the
castle that day afforded to rich and poor, held their way thither,
and acknowledged, notwithstanding their prejudices, the influence of
l'Amphitrion ou l'on dine.

Thus accompanied with the attendance both of rich and poor, Lucy
returned to her father's house. Bucklaw used his privilege of riding
next to the bride, but, new to such a situation, rather endeavoured to
attract attention by the display of his person and horsemanship, than
by any attempt to address her in private. They reached the castle in
safety, amid a thousand joyous acclamations.

It is well known that the weddings of ancient days were celebrated
with a festive publicity rejected by the delicacy of modern times. The
marriage guests, on the present occasion, were regaled with a banquet
of unbounded profusion, the relics of which, after the domestics had
feasted in their turn, were distributed among the shouting crowd, with
as many barrels of ale as made the hilarity without correspond to that
within the castle. The gentlemen, according to the fashion of the times,
indulged, for the most part, in deep draughts of the richest wines,
while the ladies, prepared for the ball which always closed a bridal
entertainment, impatiently expected their arrival in the state gallery.
At length the social party broke up at a late hour, and the gentlemen
crowded into the saloon, where, enlivened by wine and the joyful
occasion, they laid aside their swords and handed their impatient
partners to the floor. The music already rung from the gallery, along
the fretted roof of the ancient state apartment. According to strict
etiquette, the bride ought to have opened the ball; but Lady Ashton,
making an apology on account of her daughter's health, offered her own
hand to Bucklaw as substitute for her daughter's. But as Lady Ashton
raised her head gracefully, expecting the strain at which she was to
begin the dance, she was so much struck by an unexpected alteration
in the ornaments of the apartment that she was surprised into an
exclamation, "Who has dared to change the pictures?"

All looked up, and those who knew the usual state of the apartment
observed, with surprise, that the picture of Sir William Ashton's father
was removed from its place, and in its stead that of old Sir Malise
Ravenswood seemed to frown wrath and vengeance upon the party assembled
below. The exchange must have been made while the apartments were empty,
but had not been observed until the torches and lights in the sconces
were kindled for the ball. The haughty and heated spirits of the
gentlemen led them to demand an immediate inquiry into the cause of what
they deemed an affront to their host and to themselves; but Lady Ashton,
recovering herself, passed it over as the freak of a crazy wench who was
maintained about the castle, and whose susceptible imagination had been
observed to be much affected by the stories which Dame Gourlay delighted
to tell concerning "the former family," so Lady Ashton named the
Ravenswoods. The obnoxious picture was immediately removed, and the ball
was opened by Lady Ashton, with a grace and dignity which supplied the
charms of youth, and almost verified the extravagant encomiums of the
elder part of the company, who extolled her performance as far exceeding
the dancing of the rising generation.

When Lady Ashton sat down, she was not surprised to find that her
daughter had left the apartment, and she herself followed, eager to
obviate any impression which might have been made upon her nerves by an
incident so likely to affect them as the mysterious transposition of the
portraits. Apparently she found her apprehensions groundless, for she
returned in about an hour, and whispered the bridegroom, who extricated
himself from the dancers, and vanished from the apartment. The
instruments now played their loudest strains; the dancers pursued their
exercise with all the enthusiasm inspired by youth, mirth, and high
spirits, when a cry was heard so shrill and piercing as at once to
arrest the dance and the music. All stood motionless; but when the yell
was again repeated, Colonel Ashton snatched a torch from the sconce,
and demanding the key of the bridal-chamber from Henry, to whom, as
bride's-man, it had been entrusted, rushed thither, followed by Sir
William Ashton and Lady Ashton, and one or two others, near relations
of the family. The bridal guests waited their return in stupified
amazement.

Arrived at the door of the apartment, Colonel Ashton knocked and called,
but received no answer except stifled groans. He hesitated no longer
to open the door of the apartment, in which he found opposition from
something which lay against it. When he had succeeded in opening it, the
body of the bridegroom was found lying on the threshold of the bridal
chamber, and all around was flooded with blood. A cry of surprise and
horror was raised by all present; and the company, excited by this
new alarm, began to rush tumultuously towards the sleeping apartment.
Colonel Ashton, first whispering to his mother, "Search for her; she
has murdered him!" drew his sword, planted himself in the passage, and
declared he would suffer no man to pass excepting the clergyman and
a medical person present. By their assistance, Bucklaw, who still
breathed, was raised from the ground, and transported to another
apartment, where his friends, full of suspicion and murmuring, assembled
round him to learn the opinion of the surgeon.

In the mean while, Lady Ashton, her husband, and their assistants in
vain sought Lucy in the bridal bed and in the chamber. There was no
private passage from the room, and they began to think that she must
have thrown herself from the window, when one of the company, holding
his torch lower than the rest, discovered something white in the corner
of the great old-fashioned chimney of the apartment. Here they found
the unfortunate girl seated, or rather couched like a hare upon its
form--her head-gear dishevelled, her night-clothes torn and dabbled with
blood, her eyes glazed, and her features convulsed into a wild paroxysm
of insanity. When she saw herself discovered, she gibbered, made mouths,
and pointed at them with her bloody fingers, with the frantic gestures
of an exulting demoniac.

Female assistance was now hastily summoned; the unhappy bride was
overpowered, not without the use of some force. As they carried her over
the threshold, she looked down, and uttered the only articulate words
that she had yet spoken, saying, with a sort of grinning exultation,
"So, you have ta'en up your bonny bridegroom?" She was, by the
shuddering assistants, conveyed to another and more retired apartment,
where she was secured as her situation required, and closely watched.
The unutterable agony of the parents, the horror and confusion of all
who were in the castle, the fury of contending passions between the
friends of the different parties--passions augmented by previous
intemperance--surpass description.

The surgeon was the first who obtained something like a patient hearing;
he pronounced that the wound of Bucklaw, though severe and dangerous,
was by no means fatal, but might readily be rendered so by disturbance
and hasty removal. This silenced the numerous party of Bucklaw's
friends, who had previously insisted that he should, at all rates, be
transported from the castle to the nearest of their houses. They still
demanded, however, that, in consideration of what had happened, four of
their number should remain to watch over the sick-bed of their friend,
and that a suitable number of their domestics, well armed, should also
remain in the castle. This condition being acceded to on the part of
Colonel Ashton and his father, the rest of the bridegroom's friends left
the castle, notwithstanding the hour and the darkness of the night. The
cares of the medical man were next employed in behalf of Miss Ashton,
whom he pronounced to be in a very dangerous state. Farther medical
assistance was immediately summoned. All night she remained delirious.
On the morning, she fell into a state of absolute insensibility. The
next evening, the physicians said, would be the crisis of her malady. It
proved so; for although she awoke from her trance with some appearance
of calmness, and suffered her night-clothes to be changed, or put in
order, yet so soon as she put her hand to her neck, as if to search for
the for the fatal flue ribbon, a tide of recollections seemed to rush
upon her, which her mind and body were alike incapable of bearing.
Convulsion followed convulsion, till they closed in death, without her
being able to utter a word explanatory of the fatal scene.

The provincial judge of the district arrived the day after the young
lady had expired, and executed, though with all possible delicacy to
the afflicted family, the painful duty of inquiring into this fatal
transaction. But there occurred nothing to explain the general
hypothesis that the bride, in a sudden fit of insanity, had stabbed the
bridegroom at the threshold of the apartment. The fatal weapon was found
in the chamber smeared with blood. It was the same poniard which Henry
should have worn on the wedding-day, and the unhappy sister had probably
contrived to secrete on the preceding evening, when it had been shown to
her among other articles of preparation for the wedding.

The friends of Bucklaw expected that on his recovery he would throw
some light upon this dark story, and eagerly pressed him with inquiries,
which for some time he evaded under pretext of weakness. When, however,
he had been transported to his own house, and was considered in a state
of convalescence, he assembled those persons, both male and female, who
had considered themselves as entitled to press him on this subject, and
returned them thanks for the interest they had exhibited in his behalf,
and their offers of adherence and support. "I wish you all," he said,
"my friends, to understand, however, that I have neither story to tell
nor injuries to avenge. If a lady shall question me henceforward upon
the incident of that unhappy night, I shall remain silent, and in future
consider her as one who has shown herself desirous to break of her
friendship with me; in a word, I will never speak to her again. But if a
gentleman shall ask me the same question, I shall regard the incivility
as equivalent to an invitation to meet him in the Duke's Walk, and I
expect that he will rule himself accordingly."

A declaration so decisive admitted no commentary; and it was soon after
seen that Bucklaw had arisen from the bed of sickness a sadder and a
wiser man than he had hitherto shown himself. He dismissed Craigengelt
from his society, but not without such a provision as, if well employed,
might secure him against indigence and against temptation. Bucklaw
afterwards went abroad, and never returned to Scotland; nor was he known
ever to hint at the circumstances attending his fatal marriage. By many
readers this may be deemed overstrained, romantic, and composed by
the wild imagination of an author desirous of gratifying the popular
appetite for the horrible; but those who are read in the private family
history of Scotland during the period in which the scene is laid, will
readily discover, through the disguise of borrowed names and added
incidents, the leading particulars of AN OWER TRUE TALE.




CHAPTER XXXV.

     Whose mind's so marbled, and his heart so hard,
     That would not, when this huge mishap was heard,
     To th' utmost note of sorrow set their song,
     To see a gallant, with so great a grace,
     So suddenly unthought on, so o'erthrown,
     And so to perish, in so poor a place,
     By too rash riding in a ground unknown!

     POEM, IN NISBET'S Heraldry, vol. ii.

WE have anticipated the course of time to mention Bucklaw's recovery and
fate, that we might not interrupt the detail of events which succeeded
the funeral of the unfortunate Lucy Ashton. This melancholy ceremony was
performed in the misty dawn of an autumnal morning, with such moderate
attendance and ceremony as could not possibly be dispensed with. A very
few of the nearest relations attended her body to the same churchyard to
which she had so lately been led as a bride, with as little free will,
perhaps, as could be now testified by her lifeless and passive remains.
An aisle adjacent to the church had been fitted up by Sir William Ashton
as a family cemetery; and here, in a coffin bearing neither name nor
date, were consigned to dust the remains of what was once lovely,
beautiful, and innocent, though exasperated to frenzy by a long tract of
unremitting persecution.

While the mourners were busy in the vault, the three village hags, who,
notwithstanding the unwonted earliness of the hour, had snuffed the
carrion like vultures, were seated on the "through-stane," and engaged
in their wonted unhallowed conference.

"Did not I say," said Dame Gourlay, "that the braw bridal would be
followed by as braw a funeral?"

"I think," answered Dame Winnie, "there's little bravery at it: neither
meat nor drink, and just a wheen silver tippences to the poor folk; it
was little worth while to come sae far a road for sae sma' profit, and
us sae frail."

"Out, wretch!" replied Dame Gourlay, "can a' the dainties they could gie
us be half sae sweet as this hour's vengeance? There they are that
were capering on their prancing nags four days since, and they are now
ganging as dreigh and sober as oursells the day. They were a' glistening
wi' gowd and silver; they're now as black as the crook. And Miss Lucy
Ashton, that grudged when an honest woman came near her--a taid may sit
on her coffin that day, and she can never scunner when he croaks. And
Lady Ashton has hell-fire burning in her breast by this time; and Sir
William, wi' his gibbets, and his faggots, and his chains, how likes he
the witcheries of his ain dwelling-house?"

"And is it true, then," mumbled the paralytic wretch, "that the bride
was trailed out of her bed and up the chimly by evil spirits, and that
the bridegroom's face was wrung round ahint him?"

"Ye needna care wha did it, or how it was done," said Aislie Gourlay;
"but I'll uphaud it for nae stickit job, and that the lairds and leddies
ken weel this day."

"And was it true," said Annie Winnie, "sin ye ken sae muckle about it,
that the picture of auld Sir Malise Ravenswood came down on the ha'
floor, and led out the brawl before them a'?"

"Na," said Ailsie; "but into the ha' came the picture--and I ken weel
how it came there--to gie them a warning that pride wad get a fa'. But
there's as queer a ploy, cummers, as ony o' thae, that's gaun on even
now in the burial vault yonder: ye saw twall mourners, wi' crape and
cloak, gang down the steps pair and pair!"

"What should ail us to see them?" said the one old woman.

"I counted them," said the other, with the eagerness of a person to
whom the spectacle had afforded too much interest to be viewed with
indifference.

"But ye did not see," said Ailsie, exulting in her superior observation,
"that there's a thirteenth amang them that they ken naething about; and,
if auld freits say true, there's ane o' that company that'll no be lang
for this warld. But come awa' cummers; if we bide here, I'se warrant we
get the wyte o' whatever ill comes of it, and that gude will come of it
nane o' them need ever think to see."

And thus, croaking like the ravens when they anticipate pestilence, the
ill-boding sibyls withdrew from the churchyard.

In fact, the mourners, when the service of interment was ended,
discovered that there was among them one more than the invited number,
and the remark was communicated in whispers to each other. The suspicion
fell upon a figure which, muffled in the same deep mourning with the
others, was reclined, almost in a state of insensibility, against one of
the pillars of the sepulchral vault. The relatives of the Ashton family
were expressing in whispers their surprise and displeasure at the
intrusion, when they were interrupted by Colonel Ashton, who, in his
father's absence, acted as principal mourner. "I know," he said in a
whisper, "who this person is, he has, or shall soon have, as deep cause
of mourning as ourselves; leave me to deal with him, and do not disturb
the ceremony by unnecessary exposure." So saying, he separated himself
from the group of his relations, and taking the unknown mourner by the
cloak, he said to him, in a tone of suppressed emotion, "Follow me."

The stranger, as if starting from a trance at the sound of his voice,
mechanically obeyed, and they ascended the broken ruinous stair which
led from the sepulchre into the churchyard. The other mourners followed,
but remained grouped together at the door of the vault, watching with
anxiety the motions of Colonel Ashton and the stranger, who now appeared
to be in close conference beneath the shade of a yew-tree, in the most
remote part of the burial-ground.

To this sequestered spot Colonel Ashton had guided the stranger, and
then turning round, addressed him in a stern and composed tone.--"I
cannot doubt that I speak to the Master of Ravenswood?" No answer was
returned. "I cannot doubt," resumed the Colonel, trembling with rising
passion, "that I speak to the murderer of my sister!"

"You have named me but too truly," said Ravenswood, in a hollow and
tremulous voice.

"If you repent what you have done," said the Colonel, "may your
penitence avail you before God; with me it shall serve you nothing.
Here," he said, giving a paper, "is the measure of my sword, and a
memorandum of the time and place of meeting. Sunrise to-morrow morning,
on the links to the east of Wolf's Hope."

The Master of Ravenswood held the paper in his hand, and seemed
irresolute. At length he spoke--"Do not," he said, "urge to farther
desperation a wretch who is already desperate. Enjoy your life while you
can, and let me seek my death from another."

"That you never, never shall!" said Douglas Ashton. "You shall die by my
hand, or you shall complete the ruin of my family by taking my life. If
you refuse my open challenge, there is no advantage I will not take of
you, no indignity with which I will not load you, until the very name of
Ravenswood shall be the sign of everything that is dishonourable, as it
is already of all that is villainous."

"That it shall never be," said Ravenswood, fiercely; "if I am the last
who must bear it, I owe it to those who once owned it that the name
shall be extinguished without infamy. I accept your challenge, time, and
place of meeting. We meet, I presume, alone?"

"Alone we meet," said Colonel Ashton, "and alone will the survivor of us
return from that place of rendezvous."

"Then God have mercy on the soul of him who falls!" said Ravenswood.

"So be it!" said Colonel Ashton; "so far can my charity reach even for
the man I hate most deadly, and with the deepest reason. Now, break off,
for we shall be interrupted. The links by the sea-shore to the east of
Wolf's Hope; the hour, sunrise; our swords our only weapons."

"Enough," said the Master, "I will not fail you."

They separated; Colonel Ashton joining the rest of the mourners, and the
Master of Ravenswood taking his horse, which was tied to a tree behind
the church. Colonel Ashton returned to the castle with the funeral
guests, but found a pretext for detaching himself from them in the
evening, when, changing his dress to a riding-habit, he rode to Wolf's
Hope, that night, and took up his abode in the little inn, in order that
he might be ready for his rendezvous in the morning.

It is not known how the Master of Ravenswood disposed of the rest of
that unhappy day. Late at night, however, he arrived at Wolf's Crag, and
aroused his old domestic, Caleb Balderstone, who had ceased to expect
his return. Confused and flying rumours of the late tragical death of
Miss Ashton, and of its mysterious cause, had already reached the old
man, who was filled with the utmost anxiety, on account of the probable
effect these events might produce upon the mind of his master.

The conduct of Ravenswood did not alleviate his apprehensions. To the
butler's trembling entreaties that he would take some refreshment, he at
first returned no answer, and then suddenly and fiercely demanding wine,
he drank, contrary to his habits, a very large draught. Seeing that his
master would eat nothing, the old man affectionately entreated that
he would permit him to light him to his chamber. It was not until the
request was three or four times repeated that Ravenswood made a mute
sign of compliance. But when Balderstone conducted him to an apartment
which had been comfortably fitted up, and which, since his return, he
had usually occupied, Ravenswood stopped short on the threshold.

"Not here," said he, sternly; "show me the room in which my father died;
the room in which SHE slept the night the were at the castle."

"Who, sir?" said Caleb, too terrified to preserve his presence of mind.

"SHE, Lucy Ashton! Would you kill me, old man, by forcing me to repeat
her name?"

Caleb would have said something of the disrepair of the chamber, but was
silenced by the irritable impatience which was expressed in his master's
countenance; he lighted the way trembling and in silence, placed the
lamp on the table of the deserted room, and was about to attempt some
arrangement of the bed, when his master bid him begone in a tone that
admitted of no delay. The old man retired, not to rest, but to prayer;
and from time to time crept to the door of the apartment, in order to
find out whether Ravenswood had gone to repose. His measured heavy step
upon the floor was only interrupted by deep groans; and the repeated
stamps of the heel of his heavy boot intimated too clearly that the
wretched inmate was abandoning himself at such moments to paroxysms of
uncontrolled agony. The old man thought that the morning, for which he
longed, would never have dawned; but time, whose course rolls on with
equal current, however it may seem more rapid or more slow to mortal
apprehension, brought the dawn at last, and spread a ruddy light on the
broad verge of the glistening ocean. It was early in November, and the
weather was serene for the season of the year. But an easterly wind had
prevailed during the night, and the advancing tide rolled nearer than
usual to the foot of the crags on which the castle was founded.

With the first peep of light, Caleb Balderstone again resorted to the
door of Ravenswood's sleeping apartment, through a chink of which he
observed him engaged in measuring the length of two or three swords
which lay in a closet adjoining to the apartment. He muttered to
himself, as he selected one of these weapons: "It is shorter: let him
have this advantage, as he has every other."

Caleb Balderstone knew too well, from what he witnessed, upon what
enterprise his master was bound, and how vain all interference on his
part must necessarily prove. He had but time to retreat from the
door, so nearly was he surprised by his master suddenly coming out and
descending to the stables. The faithful domestic followed; and from the
dishevelled appearance of his master's dress, and his ghastly looks, was
confirmed in his conjecture that he had passed the night without sleep
or repose. He found him busily engaged in saddling his horse, a service
from which Caleb, though with faltering voice and trembling hands,
offered to relieve him. Ravenswood rejected his assistance by a mute
sign, and having led the animal into the court, was just about to mount
him, when the old domestic's fear giving way to the strong attachment
which was the principal passion of his mind, he flung himself suddenly
at Ravenswood's feet, and clasped his knees, while he exclaimed: "Oh,
sir! oh, master! kill me if you will, but do not go out on this dreadful
errand! Oh! my dear master, wait but this day; the Marquis of A----
comes to-morrow, and a' will be remedied."

"You have no longer a master, Caleb," said Ravenswood, endeavouring to
extricate himself; "why, old man, would you cling to a falling tower?"

"But I HAVE a master," cried Caleb, still holding him fast, "while the
heir of Ravenswood breathes. I am but a servant; but I was born your
father's--your grandfather's servant. I was born for the family--I have
lived for them--I would die for them! Stay but at home, and all will be
well!"

"Well, fool! well!" said Ravenswood. "Vain old man, nothing hereafter in
life will be well with me, and happiest is the hour that shall soonest
close it!"

So saying, he extricated himself from the old man's hold, threw himself
on his horse, and rode out the gate; but instantly turning back, he
threw towards Caleb, who hastened to meet him, a heavy purse of gold.

"Caleb!" he said, with a ghastly smile, "I make you my executor"; and
again turning his bridle, he resumed his course down the hill.

The gold fell unheeded on the pavement, for the old man ran to observe
the course which was taken by his master, who turned to the left down a
small and broken path, which gained the sea-shore through a cleft in the
rock, and led to a sort of cove where, in former times, the boats of
the castle were wont to be moored. Observing him take this course, Caleb
hastened to the eastern battlement, which commanded the prospect of the
whole sands, very near as far as the village of Wolf's Hope. He could
easily see his master riding in that direction, as fast as the horse
could carry him. The prophecy at once rushed on Balderstone's mind, that
the Lord of Ravenswood should perish on the Kelpie's flow, which
lay half-way betwixt the Tower and the links, or sand knolls, to the
northward of Wolf's Hope. He saw him according reach the fatal spot; but
he never saw him pass further.


Colonel Ashton, frantic for revenge, was already in the field, pacing
the turf with eagerness, and looking with impatience towards the Tower
for the arrival of his antagonist. The sun had now risen, and showed its
broad disk above the eastern sea, so that he could easily discern the
horseman who rode towards him with speed which argued impatience equal
to his own. At once the figure became invisible, as if it had melted
into the air. He rubbed his eyes, as if he had witnessed an apparition,
and then hastened to the spot, near which he was met by Balderstone,
who came from the opposite direction. No trace whatever of horse or rider
could be discerned; it only appeared that the late winds and high tides
had greatly extended the usual bounds of the quicksand, and that
the unfortunate horseman, as appeared from the hoof-tracks, in his
precipitate haste, had not attended to keep on the firm sands on the
foot of the rock, but had taken the shortest and most dangerous course.
One only vestige of his fate appeared. A large sable feather had been
detached from his hat, and the rippling waves of the rising tide wafted
it to Caleb's feet. The old man took it up, dried it, and placed it in
his bosom.

The inhabitants of Wolf's Hope were now alarmed, and crowded to the
place, some on shore, and some in boats, but their search availed
nothing. The tenacious depths of the quicksand, as is usual in such
cases, retained its prey.


Our tale draws to a conclusion. The Marquis of A----, alarmed at the
frightful reports that were current, and anxious for his kinsman's
safety, arrived on the subsequent day to mourn his loss; and, after
renewing in vain a search for the body, returned, to forget what had
happened amid the bustle of politics and state affairs.

Not so Caleb Balderstone. If wordly profit could have consoled the old
man, his age was better provided for than his earlier years had ever
been; but life had lost to him its salt and its savour. His whole course
of ideas, his feelings, whether of pride or of apprehension, of pleasure
or of pain, had all arisen from its close connexion with the family
which was now extinguished. He held up his head no longer, forsook all
his usual haunts and occupations, and seemed only to find pleasure in
moping about those apartments in the old castle which the Master of
Ravenswood had last inhabited. He ate without refreshment, and slumbered
without repose; and, with a fidelity sometimes displayed by the canine
race, but seldom by human beings, he pined and died within a year after
the catastrophe which we have narrated.


The family of Ashton did not long survive that of Ravenswood. Sir
William Ashton outlived his eldest son, the Colonel, who was slain in a
duel in Flanders; and Henry, by whom he was succeeded, died unmarried.
Lady Ashton lived to the verge of extreme old age, the only survivor
of the group of unhappy persons whose misfortunes were owing to her
implacability. That she might internally feel compunction, and reconcile
herself with Heaven, whom she had offended, we will not, and we dare
not, deny; but to those around her she did not evince the slightest
symptom either of repentance or remorse. In all external appearance she
bore the same bold, haughty, unbending character which she had displayed
before these unhappy events. A splendid marble monument records her
name, titles, and virtues, while her victims remain undistinguished by
tomb or epitath.


