
CHAPTER XV.

     We worldly men, when we see friends and kinsmen
     Past hope sunk in their fortunes, lend no hand
     To lift them up, but rather set our feet
     Upon their heads to press them to the bottom,
     As I must yield with you I practised it;
     But now I see you in a way to rise,
     I can and will assist you.

     New Way to Pay Old Debts.

THE Lord Keeper carried with him, to a couch harder than he was
accustomed to stretch himself upon, the same ambitious thoughts and
political perplexities which drive sleep from the softest down that ever
spread a bed of state. He had sailed long enough amid the contending
tides and currents of the time to be sensible of their peril, and of
the necessity of trimming his vessel to the prevailing wind, if he would
have her escape shipwreck in the storm. The nature of his talents, and
the timorousness of disposition connected with them, had made him assume
the pliability of the versatile old Earl of Northampton, who explained
the art by which he kept his ground during all the changes of state,
from the reign of Henry VIII. to that of Elizabeth, by the frank avowal,
that he was born of the willow, not of the oak. It had accordingly been
Sir William Ashton's policy, on all occasions, to watch the changes
in the political horizon, and, ere yet the conflict was decided, to
negotiate some interest for himself with the party most likely to prove
victorious. His time-serving disposition was well-known, and excited the
contempt of the more daring leaders of both factions in the state. But
his talents were of a useful and practical kind, and his legal
knowledge held in high estimation; and they so far counterbalanced other
deficiencies that those in power were glad to use and to reward, though
without absolutely trusting or greatly respecting, him.

The Marquis of A---- had used his utmost influence to effect a change in
the Scottish cabinet, and his schemes had been of late so well laid
and so ably supported, that there appeared a very great chance of his
proving ultimately successful. He did not, however, feel so strong or so
confident as to neglect any means of drawing recruits to his standard.
The acquisition of the Lord Keeper was deemed of some importance, and
a friend, perfectly acquainted with his circumstances and character,
became responsible for his political conversion.

When this gentleman arrived at Ravenswood Castle upon a visit, the real
purpose of which was disguised under general courtesy, he found the
prevailing fear which at present beset the Lord Keeper was that of
danger to his own person from the Master of Ravenswood. The language
which the blind sibyl, Old Alice, had used; the sudden appearance of the
Master, armed, and within his precincts, immediately after he had been
warned against danger from him; the cold and haughty return received in
exchange for the acknowledgments with which he loaded him for his timely
protection, had all made a strong impression on his imagination.

So soon as the Marquis's political agent found how the wind sate,
he began to insinuate fears and doubts of another kind, scarce less
calculated to affect the Lord Keeper. He inquired with seeming interest,
whether the proceedings in Sir William's complicated litigation with the
Ravenswood family were out of court, and settled without the possibility
of appeal. The Lord Keeper answered in the affirmative; but his
interrogator was too well informed to be imposed upon. He pointed out to
him, by unanswerable arguments, that some of the most important points
which had been decided in his favour against the house of Ravenswood
were liable, under the Treaty of Union, to be reviewed by the British
House of Peers, a court of equity of which the Lord Keeper felt an
instinctive dread. This course came instead of an appeal to the old
Scottish Parliament, or, as it was technically termed, "a protestation
for remeid in law."

The Lord Keeper, after he had for some time disputed the legality of
such a proceeding, was compelled, at length, to comfort himself with
the improbability of the young Master of Ravenswood's finding friends in
parliament capable of stirring in so weighty an affair.

"Do not comfort yourself with that false hope," said his wily friend;
"it is possible that, in the next session of Parliament, young
Ravenswood may find more friends and favour even than your lordship."

"That would be a sight worth seeing," said the Keeper, scornfully.

"And yet," said his friend, "such things have been seen ere now, and in
our own time. There are many at the head of affairs even now that a few
years ago were under hiding for their lives; and many a man now dines
on plate of silver that was fain to eat his crowdy without a bicker; and
many a high head has been brought full low among us in as short a space.
Scott of Scotsarvet's Staggering State of Scots Statesmen, of which
curious memoir you showed me a manuscript, has been outstaggered in our
time."

The Lord Keeper answered with a deep sigh, "That these mutations were no
new sights in Scotland, and had been witnessed long before the time of
the satirical author he had quoted. It was many a long year," he said,
"since Fordun had quoted as an ancient proverb, 'Neque dives, neque
fortis, sed nec sapiens Scotus, praedominante invidia, diu durabit in
terra.'"

"And be assured, my esteemed friend," was the answer, "that even your
long services to the state, or deep legal knowledge, will not save you,
or render your estate stable, if the Marquis of A---- comes in with
a party in the British Parliament. You know that the deceased Lord
Ravenswood was his near ally, his lady being fifth in descent from the
Knight of Tillibardine; and I am well assured that he will take young
Ravenswood by the hand, and be his very good lord and kinsman. Why
should he not? The Master is an active and stirring young fellow, able
to help himself with tongue and hands; and it is such as he that
finds friends among their kindred, and not those unarmed and unable
Mephibosheths that are sure to be a burden to every one that takes them
up. And so, if these Ravenswood cases be called over the coals in the
House of Peers, you will find that the Marquis will have a crow to pluck
with you."

"That would be an evil requital," said the Lord Keeper, "for my long
services to the state, and the ancient respect in which I have held his
lordship's honourable family and person."

"Ay, but," rejoined the agent of the Marquis, "it is in vain to look
back on past service and auld respect, my lord; it will be present
service and immediate proofs of regard which, in these sliddery times,
will be expected by a man like the Marquis."

The Lord Keeper now saw the full drift of his friend's argument, but he
was too cautious to return any positive answer.

"He knew not," he said, "the service which the Lord Marquis could expect
from one of his limited abilities, that had not always stood at his
command, still saving and reserving his duty to his king and country."

Having thus said nothing, while he seemed to say everything, for the
exception was calculated to cover whatever he might afterwards think
proper to bring under it, Sir William Ashton changed the conversation,
nor did he again permit the same topic to be introduced. His guest
departed, without having brought the wily old statesman the length
of committing himself, or of pledging himself to any future line of
conduct, but with the certainty that he had alarmed his fears in a most
sensible point, and laid a foundation for future and farther treaty.

When he rendered an account of his negotiation to the Marquis, they
both agreed that the Keeper ought not to be permitted to relapse into
security, and that he should be plied with new subjects of alarm,
especially during the absence of his lady. They were well aware that her
proud, vindictive, and predominating spirit would be likely to supply
him with the courage in which he was deficient; that she was immovably
attached to the party now in power, with whom she maintained a close
correspondence and alliance; and that she hated, without fearing, the
Ravenswood family (whose more ancient dignity threw discredit on the
newly acquired grandeur of her husband) to such a degree that she would
have perilled the interest of her own house to have the prospect of
altogether crushing that of her enemy.

But Lady Ashton was now absent. The business which had long detained her
in Edinburgh had afterwards induced her to travel to London, not without
the hope that she might contribute her share to disconcert the
intrigues of the Marquis at court; for she stood high in favour with
the celebrated Sarah Duchesss of Marlborough, to whom, in point of
character, she bore considerable resemblance. It was necessary to press
her husband hard before her return; and, as a preparatory step, the
Marquis wrote to the Master of Ravenswood the letter which we rehearsed
in a former chapter. It was cautiously worded, so as to leave it in the
power of the writer hereafter to take as deep or as slight an interest
in the fortunes of his kinsmen as the progress of his own schemes might
require. But however unwilling, as a statesman, the Marquis might be
to commit himself, or assume the character of a patron, while he had
nothing to give away, it must be said to his honour that he felt a
strong inclination effectually to befriend the Master of Ravenswood, as
well as to use his name as a means of alarming the terrors of the Lord
Keeper.

As the messenger who carried this letter was to pass near the house of
the Lord Keeper, he had it in direction that, in the village adjoining
to the park-gate of the castle, his horse should lose a shoe, and that,
while it was replaced by the smith of the place, he should express the
utmost regret for the necessary loss of time, and in the vehemence of
his impatience give it to be understood that he was bearing a message
from the Marquis of A---- to the Master of Ravenswood upon a matter of
life and death.

This news, with exaggerations, was speedily carried from various
quarters to the ears of the Lord Keeper, and each reporter dwelt upon
the extreme impatience of the courier, and the surprising short time
in which he had executed his journey. The anxious statesman heard in
silence; but in private Lockhard received orders to watch the courier
on his return, to waylay him in the village, to ply him with liquor, if
possible, and to use all means, fair or foul, to learn the contents
of the letter of which he was the bearer. But as this plot had been
foreseen, the messenger returned by a different and distant road, and
thus escaped the snare that was laid for him.

After he had been in vain expected for some time, Mr. Dingwall had
orders to made especial inquiry among his clients of Wolf's Hope,
whether such a domestic belonging to the Marquis of A----had actually
arrived at the neighbouring castle. This was easily ascertained; for
Caleb had been in the village one morning by five o'clock, to borrow
"twa chappins of ale and a kipper" for the messenger's refreshment,
and the poor fellow had been ill for twenty-four hours at Luckie
Sma'trash's, in consequence of dining upon "saut saumon and sour drink."
So that the existence of a correspondence betwixt the Marquis and his
distressed kinsman, which Sir William Ashton had sometimes treated as a
bugbear, was proved beyond the possibility of further doubt.

The alarm of the Lord Keeper became very serious; since the Claim of
Right, the power of appealing from the decisions of the civil court to
the Estates of Parliament, which had formerly been held incompetent, had
in many instances been claimed, and in some allowed, and he had no small
reason to apprehend the issue, if the English House of Lords should be
disposed to act upon an appeal from the Master of Ravenswood "for remeid
in law." It would resolve into an equitable claim, and be decided,
perhaps, upon the broad principles of justice, which were not quite so
favourable to the Lord Keeper as those of strict law. Besides, judging,
though most inaccurately, from courts which he had himself known in the
unhappy times preceding the Scottish Union, the Keeper might have too
much right to think that, in the House to which his lawsuits were to be
transferred, the old maxim might prevail which was too well recognised
in Scotland in former times: "Show me the man, and I'll show you the
law." The high and unbiased character of English judicial proceedings
was then little known in Scotland, and the extension of them to that
country was one of the most valuable advantages which it gained by the
Union. But this was a blessing which the Lord Keeper, who had lived
under another system, could not have the means of foreseeing. In the
loss of his political consequence, he anticipated the loss of his
lawsuit. Meanwhile, every report which reached him served to render
the success of the Marquis's intrigues the more probable, and the Lord
Keeper began to think it indispensable that he should look round for
some kind of protection against the coming storm. The timidity of his
temper induced him to adopt measures of compromise and conciliation. The
affair of the wild bull, properly managed, might, he thought, be made
to facilitate a personal communication and reconciliation betwixt the
Master and himself. He would then learn, if possible, what his own ideas
were of the extent of his rights, and the means of enforcing them; and
perhaps matters might be brought to a compromise, where one party was
wealthy and the other so very poor. A reconciliation with Ravenswood was
likely to give him an opportunity to play his own game with the Marquis
of A----. "And besides," said he to himself, "it will be an act of
generosity to raise up the heir of this distressed family; and if he is
to be warmly and effectually befriended by the new government, who knows
but my virtue may prove its own reward?"

Thus thought Sir William Ashton, covering with no unusual self-delusion
his interested views with a hue of virtue; and having attained this
point, his fancy strayed still farther. He began to bethink himself,
"That if Ravenswood was to have a distinguished place of power and
trust, and if such a union would sopite the heavier part of his
unadjusted claims, there might be worse matches for his daughter Lucy:
the Master might be reponed against the attainder. Lord Ravenswood was
an ancient title, and the alliance would, in some measure, legitimate
his own possession of the greater part of the Master's spoils, and make
the surrender of the rest a subject of less bitter regret."

With these mingled and multifarious plans occupying his head, the Lord
Keeper availed himself of my Lord Bittlebrains's repeated invitation
to his residence, and thus came within a very few miles of Wolf's
Crag. Here he found the lord of the mansion absent, but was courteously
received by the lady, who expected her husband's immediate return. She
expressed her particular delight at seeing Miss Ashton, and appointed
the hounds to be taken out for the Lord Keeper's special amusement.
He readily entered into the proposal, as giving him an opportunity to
reconnoitre Wolf's Crag, and perhaps to make some acquaintance with the
owner, if he should be tempted from his desolate mansion by the
chase. Lockhard had his orders to endeavour on his part to make some
acquaintance with the inmates of the castle, and we have seen how he
played his part.

The accidental storm did more to further the Lord Keeper's plan of
forming a personal acquaintance with young Ravenswood than his most
sanguine expectations could have anticipated. His fear of the young
nobleman's personal resentment had greatly decreased since he considered
him as formidable from his legal claims and the means he might have of
enforcing them. But although he thought, not unreasonably, that only
desperate circumstances drove men on desperate measures, it was not
without a secret terror, which shook his heart within him, that he first
felt himself inclosed within the desolate Tower of Wolf's Crag; a place
so well fitted, from solitude and strength, to be a scene of violence
and vengeance. The stern reception at first given to them by the Master
of Ravenswood, and the difficulty he felt in explaining to that injured
nobleman what guests were under the shelter of his roof, did not soothe
these alarms; so that when Sir William Ashton heard the door of the
courtyard shut behind him with violence, the words of Alice rung in his
ears, "That he had drawn on matters too hardly with so fierce a race as
those of Ravenswood, and that they would bide their time to be avenged."

The subsequent frankness of the Master's hospitality, as their
acquaintance increased, abated the apprehensions these recollections
were calculated to excite; and it did not escape Sir William Ashton,
that it was to Lucy's grace and beauty he owed the change in their
host's behavior.

All these thoughts thronged upon him when he took possession of
the secret chamber. The iron lamp, the unfurnished apartment, more
resembling a prison than a place of ordinary repose, the hoarse and
ceaseless sound of the waves rushing against the base of the rock on
which the castle was founded, saddened and perplexed his mind. To his
own successful machinations, the ruin of the family had been in a great
measure owing, but his disposition was crafty, and not cruel; so
that actually to witness the desolation and distress he had himself
occasioned was as painful to him as it would be to the humane mistress
of a family to superintend in person the execution of the lambs and
poultry which are killed by her own directions. At the same time,
when he thought of the alternative of restoring to Ravenswood a large
proportion of his spoils, or of adopting, as an ally and member of his
own family, the heir of this impoverished house, he felt as the spider
may be supposed to do when his whole web, the intricacies of which had
been planned with so much art, is destroyed by the chance sweep of a
broom. And then, if he should commit himself too far in this matter, it
gave rise to a perilous question, which many a good husband, when under
temptation to act as a free agent, has asked himself without being able
to return a satisfactory answer: "What will my wife--what will Lady
Ashton say?" On the whole, he came at length to the resolution in
which minds of a weaker cast so often take refuge. He resolved to
watch events, to take advantage of circumstances as they occurred, and
regulate his conduct accordingly. In this spirit of temporising policy,
he at length composed his mind to rest.




CHAPTER XVI.

     A slight note I have about me for you, for the delivery of which
     you must excuse me. It is an offer that friendship calls upon me
     to do, and no way offensive to you, since I desire nothing but
     right upon both sides.

     King and no King.

WHEN Ravenswood and his guest met in the morning, the gloom of the
Master's spirit had in part returned. He, also, had passed a night
rather of reflection that of slumber; and the feelings which he could
not but entertain towards Lucy Ashton had to support a severe conflict
against those which he had so long nourished against her father. To
clasp in friendship the hand of the enemy of his house, to entertain him
under his roof, to exchange with him the courtesies and the kindness of
domestic familiarity, was a degradation which his proud spirit could not
be bent to without a struggle.

But the ice being once broken, the Lord Keeper was resolved it should
not have time against to freeze. It had been part of his plan to stun
and confuse Ravenswood's ideas, by a complicated and technical statement
of the matters which had been in debate betwixt their families, justly
thinking that it would be difficult for a youth of his age to follow
the expositions of a practical lawyer, concerning actions of compt and
reckoning, and of multiplepoindings, and adjudications and wadsets,
proper and improper, and poindings of the ground, and declarations of
the expiry of the legal. "Thus," thought Sir William, "I shall have
all the grace of appearing perfectly communicative, while my party will
derive very little advantage from anything I may tell him." He therefore
took Ravenswood aside into the deep recess of a window in the hall, and
resuming the discourse of the proceeding evening, expressed a hope that
his young friend would assume some patience, in order to hear him enter
in a minute and explanatory detail of those unfortunate circumstances
in which his late honourable father had stood at variance with the Lord
Keeper. The Master of Ravenswood coloured highly, but was silent; and
the Lord Keeper, though not greatly approving the sudden heightening
of his auditor's complexion, commenced the history of a bond for twenty
thousand merks, advanced by his father to the father of Allan Lord
Ravenswood, and was proceeding to detail the executorial proceedings
by which this large sum had been rendered a debitum fundi, when he was
interrupted by the Master.

"It is not in this place," he said, "that I can hear Sir William
Ashton's explanation of the matters in question between us. It is not
here, where my father died of a broken heart, that I can with decency
or temper investigate the cause of his distress. I might remember that I
was a son, and forget the duties of a host. A time, however, there must
come, when these things shall be discussed, in a place and in a presence
where both of us will have equal freedom to speak and to hear."

"Any time," the Lord Keeper said, "any place, was alike to those who
sought nothing but justice. Yet it would seem he was, in fairness,
entitled to some premonition respecting the grounds upon which the
Master proposed to impugn the whole train of legal proceedings, which
had been so well and ripely advised in the only courts competent."

"Sir William Ashton," answered the Master, with warmth, "the lands which
you now occupy were granted to my remote ancestor for services done with
his sword against the English invaders. How they have glided from us by
a train of proceedings that seem to be neither sale, nor mortgage, nor
adjudication for debt, but a nondescript and entangled mixture of all
these rights; how annual rent has been accumulated upon principal, and
no nook or coign of legal advantage left unoccupied, until our interest
in our hereditary property seems to have melted away like an icicle in
thaw--all this you understand better than I do. I am willing, however,
to suppose, from the frankness of your conduct towards me, that I may in
a great measure have mistaken your personal character, and that things
may have appeared right and fitting to you, a skilful and practised
lawyer, which to my ignorant understanding seem very little short of
injustice and gross oppression."

"And you, my dear Master," answered Sir William--"you, permit me to say,
have been equally misrepresented to me. I was taught to believe you
a fierce, imperious, hot-headed youth, ready, at the slightest
provocation, to throw your sword into the scales of justice, and to
appeal to those rude and forcible measures from which civil polity has
long protected the people of Scotland. Then, since we were mutually
mistaken in each other, why should not the young nobleman be willing
to listen to the old lawyer, while, at least, he explains the points of
difference betwixt them?"

"No, my lord," answered Ravenswood; "it is in the House of British
Peers, whose honour must be equal to their rank--it is in the court of
last resort that we must parley together. The belted lords of Britain,
her ancient peers, must decide, if it is their will that a house,
not the least noble of their members, shall be stripped of their
possessions, the reward of the patriotism of generations, as the pawn of
a wretched mechanic becomes forfeit to the usurer the instant the hour
of redemption has passed away. If they yield to the grasping severity of
the creditor, and to the gnawing usury that eats into our lands as moths
into a raiment, it will be of more evil consequence to them and their
posterity than to Edgar Ravenswood. I shall still have my sword and my
cloak, and can follow the profession of arms wherever a trumpet shall
sound."

As he pronounced these words, in a firm yet melancholy tone, he raised
his eyes, and suddenly encountered those of Lucy Ashton, who had stolen
unawares on their interview, and observed her looks fastened on them
with an expression of enthusiastic interest and admiration, which had
wrapt her for the moment beyond the fear of discovery. The noble form
and fine features of Ravenswood, fired with the pride of birth and sense
of internal dignity, the mellow and expressive tones of his voice,
the desolate state of his fortunes, and the indifference with which he
seemed to endure and to dare the worst that might befall, rendered him a
dangerous object of contemplation for a maiden already too much
disposed to dwell upon recollections connected with him. When their eyes
encountered each other, both blushed deeply, conscious of some strong
internal emotion, an shunned again to meet each other's looks. Sir
William Ashton had, of course, closely watched the expression of their
countenances. "I need fear," said he internally, "neither Parliament nor
protestation; I have an effectual mode of reconciling myself with this
hot-tempered young fellow, in case he shall become formidable. The
present object is, at all events, to avoid committing ourselves. The
hook is fixed; we will nto strain the line too soon: it is as well to
reserve the privilege of slipping it loose, if we do not find the fish
worth landing."

In this selfish and cruel calculation upon the supposed attachment of
Ravenswood to Lucy, he was so far from considering the pain he might
give to the former, by thus dallying with his affections, that he even
did not think upon the risk of involving his own daughter in the perils
of an unfortunate passion; as if her predilection, which could not
escape his attention, were like the flame of a taper which might be
lighted or extinguished at pleasure. But Providence had prepared a
dreadful requital for this keen observer of human passions, who had
spent his life in securing advantages to himself by artfully working
upon the passions of others.

Caleb Balderstone now came to announce that breakfast was prepared; for
in those days of substantial feeding, the relics of the supper simply
furnished forth the morning meal. Neither did he forget to present to
the Lord Keeper, with great reverence, a morning draught in a large
pewter cup, garnished with leaves of parsley and scurvy-grass. He craved
pardon, of course, for having omitted to serve it in the great silver
standing cup as behoved, being that it was at present in a silversmith's
in Edinburgh, for the purpose of being overlaid with gilt.

"In Edinburgh like enough," said Ravenswood; "but in what place, or for
what purpose, I am afraid neither you nor I know."

"Aweel!" said Caleb, peevishly, "there's a man standing at the gate
already this morning--that's ae thing that I ken. Does your honour ken
whether ye will speak wi' him or no?"

"Does he wish to speak with me, Caleb?"

"Less will no serve him," said Caleb; "but ye had best take a visie of
him through the wicket before opening the gate; it's no every ane we
suld let into this castle."

"What! do you suppose him to be a messenger come to arrest me for debt?"
said Ravenswood.

"A messenger arrest your honour for debt, and in your Castle of Wolf's
Crag! Your honour is jesting wi' auld Caleb this morning." However, he
whispered in his ear, as he followed him out, "I would be loth to do ony
decent man a prejudice in your honour's gude opinion; but I would tak
twa looks o' that chield before I let him within these walls."

He was not an officer of the law, however; being no less a person than
Captain Craigengelt, with his nose as red as a comfortable cup of brandy
could make it, his laced cocked hat set a little aside upon the top
of his black riding periwig, a sword by his side and pistols at his
holsters, and his person arrayed in a riding suit, laid over with
tarnished lace--the very moral of one who would say, "Stand to a true
man."

When the Master had recognised him, he ordered the gates to be opened.
"I suppose," he said, "Captain Craigengelt, there are no such weighty
matters betwixt you and me, but may be discussed in this place. I have
company in the castle at present, and the terms upon which we last
parted must excuse my asking you to make part of them."

Craigengelt, although possessing the very perfection of impudence, was
somewhat abashed by this unfavourable reception. "He had no intention,"
he said, "to force himself upon the Master of Ravenswood's hospitality;
he was in the honourable service of bearing a message to him from a
friend, otherwise the Master of Ravenswood should not have had reason to
complain of this intrusion."

"Let it be short, sir," said the Master, "for that will be the best
apology. Who is the gentleman who is so fortunate as to have your
services as a messenger?"

"My friend, Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw," answered Craigengelt, with
conscious importance, and that confidence which the acknowledged courage
of his principal inspired, "who conceives himself to have been treated
by you with something much short of the respect which he had reason to
demand, and, therefore is resolved to exact satisfaction. I bring with
me," said he, taking a piece of paper out of his pocket, "the precise
length of his sword; and he requests you will meet him, accompanied by
a friend, and equally armed, at any place within a mile of the castle,
when I shall give attendance as umpire, or second, on his behoof."

"Satisfaction! and equal arms!" repeated Ravenswood, who, the reader
will recollect, had no reason to suppose he had given the slightest
offence to his late intimate; "upon my word, Captain Craigengelt, either
you have invented the most improbable falsehood that ever came into the
mind of such a person, or your morning draught has been somewhat of the
strongest. What could persuade Bucklaw to send me such a message?"

"For that, sir," replied Craigengelt, "I am desired to refer you to
what, in duty to my friend, I am to term your inhospitality in excluding
him from your house, without reasons assigned."

"It is impossible," replied the Master; "he cannot be such a fool as to
interpret actual necessity as an insult. Nor do I believe that, knowing
my opinion of you, Captain, he would have employed the services of so
slight and inconsiderable a person as yourself upon such an errand, as I
certainly could expect no man of honour to act with you in the office of
umpire."

"I slight and inconsiderable?" said Craigengelt, raising his voice, and
laying his hand on his cutlass; "if it were not that the quarrel of
my friend craves the precedence, and is in dependence before my own, I
would give you to understand----"

"I can understand nothing upon your explanation, Captain Craigengelt. Be
satisfied of that, and oblige me with your departure."

"D----n!" muttered the bully; "and is this the answer which I am to
carry back to an honourable message?"

"Tell the Laird of Bucklaw," answered Ravenswood, "if you are really
sent by him, that, when he sends me his cause of grievance by a person
fitting to carry such an errand betwixt him and me, I will either
explain it or maintain it."

"Then, Master, you will at least cause to be returned to Hayston, by my
hands, his property which is remaining in your possession."

"Whatever property Bucklaw may have left behind him, sir," replied the
Master, "shall be returned to him by my servant, as you do not show me
any credentials from him which entitle you to receive it."

"Well, Master," said Captain Craigengelt, with malice which even his
fear of the consequences could not suppress, "you have this morning done
me an egregious wrong adn dishonour, but far more to yourself. A castle
indeed!" he continued, looking around him; "why, this is worse than
a coupe-gorge house, where they receive travellers to plunder them of
their property."

"You insolent rascal," said the Master, raising his cane, and making a
grasp at the Captain's bridle, "if you do not depart without uttering
another syllable, I will batoon you to death!"

At the motion of the Master towards him, the bully turned so rapidly
round, that with some difficulty he escaped throwing down his horse,
whose hoofs struck fire from the rocky pavement in every direction.
Recovering him, however, with the bridle, he pushed for the gate, and
rode sharply back again in the direction of the village.

As Ravenswood turned round to leave the courtyard after this dialogue,
he found that the Lord Keeper had descended from the hall, and
witnessed, though at the distance prescribed by politeness, his
interview with Craigengelt.

"I have seen," said the Lord Keeper, "that gentleman's face, and at no
great distance of time; his name is Craig--Craig--something, is it not?"

"Craigengelt is the fellow's name," said the Master, "at least that by
which he passes at present."

"Craig-in-guilt," said Caleb, punning upon the word "craig," which in
Scotch signifies throat; "if he is Craig-in-guilt just now, he is as
likely to be Craig-in-peril as ony chield I ever saw; the loon has
woodie written on his very visnomy, and I wad wager twa and a plack that
hemp plaits his cravat yet."

"You understand physiognomy, good Mr. Caleb," said the Keeper, smiling;
"I assure you the gentleman has been near such a consummation before
now; for I most distinctly recollect that, upon occasion of a journey
which I made about a fortnight ago to Edinburgh, I saw Mr. Craigengelt,
or whatever is his name, undergo a severe examination before the privy
council."

"Upon what account?" said the Master of Ravenswood, with some interest.

The question led immediately to a tale which the Lord Keeper had been
very anxious to introduce, when he could find a graceful and fitting
opportunity. He took hold of the Master's arm, and led him back towards
the hall. "The answer to your question," he said, "though it is a
ridiculous business, is only fit for your own ear."

As they entered the hall, he again took the Master apart into one of
the recesses of the window, where it will be easily believed that Miss
Ashton did not venture again to intrude upon their conference.




CHAPTER XVII.

     Here is a father now,
     Will truck his daughter for a foreign venture,
     Make her the stop-gap to some canker'd feud,
     Or fling her o'er, like Jonah, to the fishes,
     To appease the sea at highest.

     Anonymous.

THE Lord Keeper opened his discourse with an appearance of unconcern,
marking, however, very carefully, the effect of his communication upon
young Ravenswood.

"You are aware," he said, "my young friend, that suspicion is the
natural vice of our unsettled times, and exposes the best and wisest of
us to the imposition of artful rascals. If I had been disposed to listen
to such the other day, or even if I had been the wily politicians which
you have been taught to believe me, you, Master of Ravenswood, instead
of being at freedom, and with fully liberty to solicit and act against
me as you please, in defence of what you suppose to be your rights,
would have been in the Castle of Edinburgh, or some other state prison;
or, if you had escaped that destiny, it must have been by flight to a
foreign country, and at the risk of a sentence of fugitation."

"My Lord Keeper," said the Master, "I think you would not jest on such a
subject; yet it seems impossible you can be in earnest."

"Innocence," said the Lord Keeper, "is also confident, and sometimes,
though very excusably, presumptuously so."

"I do not understand," said Ravenswood, "how a consciousess of innocence
can be, in any case, accounted presumptuous."

"Imprudent, at least, it may be called," said Sir William Ashton, "since
it is apt to lead us into the mistake of supposing that sufficiently
evident to others of which, in fact, we are only conscious ourselves. I
have known a rogue, for this very reason, make a better defence than
an innocent man could have done in the same circumstances of suspicion.
Having no consciousness of innocence to support him, such a fellow
applies himself to all the advantages which the law will afford him, and
sometimes--if his counsel be men of talent--succeeds in compelling his
judges to receive him as innocent. I remember the celebrated case of Sir
Coolie Condiddle of Condiddle, who was tried for theft under trust, of
which all the world knew him guilty, and yet was not only acquitted, but
lived to sit in judgment on honester folk."

"Allow me to beg you will return to the point," said the Master; "you
seemed to say that I had suffered under some suspicion."

"Suspicion, Master! Ay, truly, and I can show you the proofs of it; if
I happen only to have them with me. Here, Lockhard." His attendant came.
"Fetch me the little private mail with the padlocks, that I recommended
to your particular charge, d'ye hear?"

"Yes, my lord." Lockhard vanished; and the Keeper continued, as if half
speaking to himself.

"I think the papers are with me--I think so, for, as I was to be in
this country, it was natural for me to bring them with me. I have them,
however, at Ravenswood Castle, that I am sure; so perhaps you might
condescend----"

Here Lockhard entered, and put the leathern scrutoire, or mail-box,
into his hands. The Keeper produced one or two papers, respecting the
information laid before the privy council concerning the riot, as it was
termed, at the funeral of Allan Lord Ravenswood, and the active share he
had himself taken in quashing the proceedings against the Master. These
documents had been selected with care, so as to irritate the natural
curiosity of Ravenswood upon such a subject, without gratifying it, yet
to show that Sir William Ashton had acted upon that trying occasion
the part of an advocate and peacemaker betwixt him and the jealous
authorities of the day. Having furnished his host with such subjects for
examination, the Lord Keeper went to the breakfast-table, and entered
into light conversation, addressed partly to old Caleb, whose resentment
against the usurper of the Castle of Ravenswood began to be softened by
his familiarity, and partly to his daughter.

After perusing these papers, the Master of Ravenswood remained for
a minute or two with his hand pressed against his brow, in deep and
profound meditation. He then again ran his eye hastily over the papers,
as if desirous of discovering in them some deep purpose, or some mark
of fabrication, which had escaped him at first perusal. Apparently the
second reading confirmed the opinion which had pressed upon him at the
first, for he started from the stone bench on which he was sitting,
and, going to the Lord Keeper, took his hand, and, strongly pressing it,
asked his pardon repeatedly for the injustice he had done him, when it
appeared he was experiencing, at his hands, the benefit of protection to
his person and vindication to his character.

The statesman received these acknowledgments at first with well-feigned
surprise, and then with an affectation of frank cordiality. The tears
began already to start from Lucy's blue eyes at viewing this unexpected
and moving scene. To see the Master, late so haughty and reserved, and
whom she had always supposed the injured person, supplicating her
father for forgiveness, was a change at once surprising, flattering, and
affecting.

"Dry your eyes, Lucy," said her father; "why should you weep, because
your father, though a lawyer, is discovered to be a fair and honourable
man? What have you to thank me for, my dear Master," he continued,
addressing Ravenswood, "that you would not have done in my case? 'Suum
cuique tribuito,' was the Roman justice, and I learned it when I studied
Justinian. Besides, have you not overpaid me a thousand times, in saving
the life of this dear child?"

"Yes," answered the Master, in all the remorse of self-accusation; "but
the little service _I_ did was an act of mere brutal instinct; YOUR
defence of my cause, when you knew how ill I thought of you, and how
much I was disposed to be your enemy, was an act of generous, manly, and
considerate wisdom."

"Pshaw!" said the Lord Keeper, "each of us acted in his own way; you as
a gallant soldier, I as an upright judge and privy-councillor. We could
not, perhaps, have changed parts; at least I should have made a very
sorry tauridor, and you, my good Master, though your cause is so
excellent, might have pleaded it perhaps worse yourself than I who acted
for you before the council."

"My generous friend!" said Ravenswood; and with that brief word,
which the Keeper had often lavished upon him, but which he himself now
pronounced for the first time, he gave to his feudal enemy the full
confidence of an haughty but honourable heart. The Master had been
remarked among his contemporaries for sense and acuteness, as well
as for his reserved, pertinacious, and irascible character. His
prepossessions accordingly, however obstinate, were of a nature to give
way before love and gratitude; and the real charms of the daughter,
joined to the supposed services of the father, cancelled in his memory
the vows of vengeance which he had taken so deeply on the eve of his
father's funeral. But they had been heard and registered in the book of
fate.

Caleb was present at this extraordinary scene, and he could conceive no
other reason for a proceeding so extraordinary than an alliance betwixt
the houses, and Ravenswood Castle assigned for the young lady's dowry.
As for Lucy, when Ravenswood uttered the most passionate excuses for his
ungrateful negligence, she could but smile through her tears, and, as
she abandoned her hand to him, assure him, in broken accents, of the
delight with which she beheld the complete reconciliation between her
father and her deliverer. Even the statesman was moved and affected
by the fiery, unreserved, and generous self-abandonment with which the
Master of Ravenswood renounced his feudal enmity, and threw himself
without hesitation upon his forgiveness. His eyes glistened as he looked
upon a couple who were obviously becoming attached, and who seemed made
for each other. He thought how high the proud and chivalrous character
of Ravenswood might rise under many circumstances in which HE found
himself "overcrowed," to use a phrase of Spenser, and kept under, by
his brief pedigree, and timidity of disposition. Then his daughter--his
favorite child--his constant playmate--seemed formed to live happy in
a union with such a commanding spirit as Ravenswood; and even the fine,
delicate, fragile form of Lucy Ashton seemed to require the support of
the Master's muscular strength and masculine character. And it was not
merely during a few minutes that Sir William Ashton looked upon their
marriage as a probable and even desirable event, for a full hour
intervened ere his imagination was crossed by recollection of the
Master's poverty, and the sure displeasure of Lady Ashton. It is
certain, that the very unusual flow of kindly feeling with which the
Lord Keeper had been thus surprised, was one of the circumstances which
gave much tacit encouragement to the attachment between the Master and
his daughter, and led both the lovers distinctly to believe that it
was a connexion which would be most agreeable to him. He himself
was supposed to have admitted this in effect, when, long after
the catastrophe of their love, he used to warn his hearers against
permitting their feelings to obtain an ascendency over their judgment,
and affirm, that the greatest misfortune of his life was owing to a
very temporary predominance of sensibility over self-interest. It must
be owned, if such was the case, he was long and severely punished for an
offence of very brief duration.

After some pause, the Lord Keeper resumed the conversation.--

"In your surprise at finding me an honester man than you expected, you
have lost your curiosity about this Craigengelt, my good Master; and yet
your name was brought in, in the course of that matter too."

"The scoundrel!" said Ravenswood. "My connexion with him was of the
most temporary nature possible; and yet I was very foolish to hold any
communication with him at all. What did he say of me?"

"Enough," said the Keeper, "to excite the very loyal terrors of some
of our sages, who are for proceeding against men on the mere grounds of
suspicion or mercenary information. Some nonsense about your proposing
to enter into the service of France, or of the Pretender, I don't
recollect which, but which the Marquis of A----, one of your best
friends, and another person, whom some call one of your worst and most
interested enemies, could not, somehow, be brought to listen to."

"I am obliged to my honourable friend; and yet," shaking the Lord
Keeper's hand--"and yet I am still more obliged to my honourable enemy."

"Inimicus amicissimus," said the Lord Keeper, returning the pressure;
"but this gentleman--this Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw--I am afraid the
poor young man--I heard the fellow mention his name--is under very bad
guidance."

"He is old enough to govern himself," answered the Master.

"Old enough, perhaps, but scarce wise enough, if he has chosen this
fellow for his fidus Achates. Why, he lodged an information against
him--that is, such a consequence might have ensued from his examination,
had we not looked rather at the character of the witness than the tenor
of his evidence."

"Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw," said the master, "is, I believe, a most
honourable man, and capable of nothing that is mean or disgraceful."

"Capable of much that is unreasonable, though; that you must needs
allow, master. Death will soon put him in possession of a fair estate,
if he hath it not already; old Lady Girnington--an excellent person,
excepting that her inveterate ill-nature rendered her intolerable to the
whole world--is probably dead by this time. Six heirs portioners have
successively died to make her wealthy. I know the estates well; they
march with my own--a noble property."

"I am glad of it," said Ravenswood, "and should be more so, were I
confident that Bucklaw would change his company and habits with his
fortunes. This appearance of Craigengelt, acting in the capacity of his
friend, is a most vile augury for his future respectability."

"He is a bird of evil omen, to be sure," said the Keeper, "and croaks
of jail and gallows-tree. But I see Mr. Caleb grows impatient for our
return to breakfast."




CHAPTER XVIII.

     Sir, stay at home and take an old man's counsel;
     Seek not to bask you by a stranger's hearth;
     Our own blue smoke is warmer than their fire.
     Domestic food is wholesome, though 'tis homely,
     And foreign dainties poisonous, though tasteful.

     The French Courtezan.

THE Master of Ravenswood took an opportunity to leave his guests
to prepare for their departure, while he himself made the brief
arrangements necessary previous to his absence from Wolf's Crag for a
day or two. It was necessary to communicate with Caleb on this occasion,
and he found that faithful servitor in his sooty and ruinous den,
greatly delighted with the departure of their visitors, and computing
how long, with good management, the provisions which had been unexpended
might furnish the Master's table. "He's nae belly god, that's ae
blessing; and Bucklaw's gane, that could have eaten a horse behind
the saddle. Cresses or water-purpie, and a bit ait-cake, can serve
the Master for breakfast as weel as Caleb. Then for dinner--there's no
muckle left on the spule-bane; it will brander, though--it will brander
very weel."

His triumphant calculations were interrupted by the Master, who
communicated to him, not without some hesitation, his purpose to ride
with the Lord Keeper as far as Ravenswood Castle, and to remain there
for a day or two.

"The mercy of Heaven forbid!" said the old serving-man, turning as pal
as the table-cloth which he was folding up.

"And why, Caleb?" said his master--"why should the mercy of Heaven
forbid my returning the Lord Keeper's visit?"

"Oh, sir!" replied Caleb--"oh, Mr. Edgar! I am your servant, and it ill
becomes me to speak; but I am an auld servant--have served baith
your father and gudesire, and mind to have seen Lord Randal, your
great-grandfather, but that was when I was a bairn."

"And what of all this, Balderstone?" said the Master; "what can
it possibly have to do with my paying some ordinary civility to a
neighbour."

"Oh, Mr. Edgar,--that is, my lord!" answered the butler, "your ain
conscience tells you it isna for your father's son to be neighbouring
wi' the like o' him; it isna for the credit of the family. An he were
ance come to terms, and to gie ye back your ain, e'en though ye suld
honour his house wi' your alliance, I suldna say na; for the young leddy
is a winsome sweet creature. But keep your ain state wi' them--I ken the
race o' them weel--they will think the mair o' ye."

"Why, now, you go father than I do, Caleb," said the Master, drowning a
certain degree of consciousness in a forced laugh; "you are for marrying
me into a family that you will nto allow me to visit, how this? and you
look as pale as death besides."

"Oh, sir," repeated Caleb again, "you would but laugh if I tauld it; but
Thomas the Rhymer, whose tongue couldna be fause, spoke the word of your
house that will e'en prove ower true if you go to Ravenswood this day.
Oh, that it should e'er have been fulfilled in my time!"

"And what is it, Caleb?" said Ravenswood, wishing to soothe the fears of
his old servant.

Caleb replied: "He had never repeated the lines to living mortal; they
were told to him by an auld priest that had been confessor to Lord
Allan's father when the family were Catholic. But mony a time," he said,
"I hae soughed thae dark words ower to myself, and, well-a-day! little
did I think of their coming round this day."

"Truce with your nonsense, and let me hear the doggerel which has put it
into your head," said the Master, impatiently.

With a quivering voice, and a cheek pale with apprehension, Caleb
faltered out the following lines:

"When the last Laird of Ravenswood to Ravenswood shall ride, And woo a
dead maiden to be his bride, He shall stable his steed in the Kelpie's
flow, And his name shall be lost for evermoe!"

"I know the Kelpie's flow well enough," said the Master; "I suppose, at
least, you mean the quicksand betwixt this tower and Wolf's Hope; but
why any man in his senses should stable a steed there----"

"Oh, ever speer ony thing about that, sir--God forbid we should ken what
the prophecy means--but just bide you at hame, and let the strangers
ride to Ravenswood by themselves. We have done eneugh for them; and
to do mair would be mair against the credit of the family than in its
favour."

"Well, Caleb," said the Master, "I give you the best possible credit for
your good advice on this occasion; but as I do not go to Ravenswood to
seek a bride, dead or alive, I hope I shall choose a better stable for
my horse than the Kelpie's quicksand, and especially as I have always
had a particular dread of it since the patrol of dragoons were
lost there ten years since. My father and I saw them from the tower
struggling against the advancing tide, and they were lost long before
any help could reach them."

"And they deserved it weel, the southern loons!" said Caleb; "what had
they ado capering on our sands, and hindering a wheen honest folk frae
bringing on shore a drap brandy? I hae seen them that busy, that I
wad hae fired the auld culverin or the demi-saker that's on the south
bartizan at them, only I was feared they might burst in the ganging
aff."

Caleb's brain was now fully engaged with abuse of the English soldiery
and excisemen, so that his master found no great difficulty in
escaping from him and rejoining his guests. All was now ready for
their departure; and one of the Lord Keeper's grooms having saddled the
Master's steed, they mounted in the courtyard.

Caleb had, with much toil, opened the double doors of the outward gate,
and thereat stationed himself, endeavouring, by the reverential, and at
the same time consequential, air which he assumed, to supply, by his
own gaunt, wasted, and thin person, the absence of a whole baronial
establishment of porters, warders, and liveried menials.

The Keeper returned his deep reverence with a cordial farewell, stooping
at the same time from his horse, and sliding into the butler's hand the
remuneration which in those days was always given by a departing guest
to the domestics of the family where he had been entertained. Lucy
smiled on the old man with her usual sweetness, bade him adieu, and
deposited her guerdon with a grace of action and a gentleness of accent
which could not have failed to have won the faithful retainer's heart,
but for Thomas the Rhymer, and the successful lawsuit against his
master. As it was, he might have adopted the language of the Duke in As
You Like It:

Thou wouldst have better pleased me with this deed, If thou hadst told
me of another father.

Ravenswood was at the lady's bridle-rein, encouraging her timidity, and
guiding her horse carefully down the rocky path which led to the moor,
when one of the servants announced from the rear that Caleb was calling
loudly after them, desiring to speak with his master. Ravenswood felt it
would look singular to neglect this summons, although inwardly cursing
Caleb for his impertinent officiousness; therefore he was compelled to
relinquish to Mr. Lockhard the agreeable duty in which he was engaged,
and to ride back to the gate of the courtyard. Here he was beginning,
somewhat peevishly, to ask Caleb the cause of his clamour, when the good
old man exclaimed: "Whisht, sir!--whisht, and let me speak just ae word
that I couldna say afore folk; there (putting into his lord's hand the
money he had just received)--there's three gowd pieces; and ye'll
want siller up-bye yonder. But stay, whisht, now!" for the Master was
beginning to exclaim against this transference, "never say a word, but
just see to get them changed in the first town ye ride through, for they
are bran new frae the mint, and ken-speckle a wee bit."

"You forget, Caleb," said his master, striving to force back the money
on his servant, and extricate the bridle from his hold--"you forget that
I have some gold pieces left of my own. Keep these to yourself, my old
friend; and, once more, good day to you. I assure you, I have plenty.
You know you have managed that our living should cost us little or
nothing."

"Aweel," said Caleb, "these will serve for you another time; but see ye
hae eneugh, for, doubtless, for the credit of the family, there maun be
some civility to the servants, and ye maun hae something to mak a show
with when they say, 'Master, will you bet a broad piece?' Then ye maun
tak out your purse, and say, 'I carena if I do'; and tak care no to
agree on the articles of the wager, and just put up your purse again,
and----"

"This is intolerable, Caleb; I really must be gone."

"And you will go, then?" said Caleb, loosening his hold upon the
Master's cloak, and changing his didactics into a pathetic and mournful
tone--"and you WILL go, for a' I have told you about the prophecy, and
the dead bride, and the Kelpie's quicksand? Aweel! a wilful man maun
hae his way: he that will to Cupar maun to Cupar. But pity of your life,
sir, if ye be fowling or shooting in the Park, beware of drinking at the
Mermaiden's Well--He's gane! he's down the path arrow-flight after her!
The head is as clean taen aff the Ravenswood family this day as I wad
chap the head aff a sybo!"

The old butler looked long after his master, often clearing away the dew
as it rose to his eyes, that he might, as long as possible, distinguish
his stately form from those of the other horsemen. "Close to her
bridle-rein--ay, close to her bridle-rein! Wisely saith the holy man,
'By this also you may know that woman hath dominion over all men'; and
without this lass would not our ruin have been a'thegither fulfilled."

With a heart fraught with such sad auguries did Caleb return to
his necessary duties at Wofl's Crag, as soon as he could no longer
distinguish the object of his anxiety among the group of riders, which
diminished in the distance.

In the mean time the party pursued their route joyfully. Having once
taken his resolution, the Master of Ravenswood was not of a character to
hesitate or pause upon it. He abandoned himself to the pleasure he felt
in Miss Ashton's company, and displayed an assiduous gallantry which
approached as nearly to gaiety as the temper of his mind and state of
his family permitted. The Lord Keeper was much struck with his depth of
observation, and the unusual improvement which he had derived from his
studies. Of these accomplishments Sir William Ashton's profession and
habits of society rendered him an excellent judge; and he well knew how
to appreciate a quality to which he himself was a total stranger--the
brief and decided dauntlessness of the Master of Ravenswood's fear. In
his heart the Lord Keeper rejoiced at having conciliated an adversary
so formidable, while, with a mixture of pleasure and anxiety, he
anticipated the great things his young companion might achieve, were the
breath of court-favour to fill his sails.

"What could she desire," he thought, his mind always conjuring
up opposition in the person of Lady Ashton to his new prevailing
wish--"what could a woman desire in a match more than the sopiting of
a very dangerous claim, and the alliance of a son-in-law, noble, brave,
well-gifted, and highly connected; sure to float whenever the tide
sets his way; strong, exactly where we are weak, in pedigree and in the
temper of a swordsman? Sure, no reasonable woman would hesitate. But
alas----!" Here his argument was stopped by the consciousness that Lady
Ashton was not always reasonable, in his sense of the word. "To prefer
some clownish Merse laird to the gallant young nobleman, and to the
secure possession of Ravenswood upon terms of easy compromise--it would
be the act of a madwoman!"

Thus pondered the veteran politician, until they reached Bittlebrains
House, where it had been previously settled they were to dine and repose
themselves, and prosecute their journey in the afternoon.

They were received with an excess of hospitality; and the most marked
attention was offered to the Master of Ravenswood, in particular, by
their noble entertainers. The truth was, that Lord Bittlebrains had
obtained his peerage by a good deal of plausibility, an art of building
up a character for wisdom upon a very trite style of commonplace
eloquence, a steady observation of the changes of the times, and the
power of rendering certain political services to those who could best
reward them. His lady and he, not feeling quite easy under their new
honours, to which use had not adapted their feelings, were very desirous
to procure the fraternal countenance of those who were born denizens of
the regions into which they had been exalted from a lower sphere. The
extreme attention which they paid to the Master of Ravenswood had its
usual effect in exalting his importance in the eyes of the Lord
Keeper, who, although he had a reasonable degree of contempt for
Lord Bittlebrains's general parts, entertained a high opinion of the
acuteness of his judgment in all matters of self-interest.

"I wish Lady Ashton had seen this," was his internal reflection; "no man
knows so well as Bittlebrains on which side his bread is buttered; and
he fawns on the Master like a beggar's messan on a cook. And my lady,
too, bringing forward her beetle-browed misses to skirl and play upon
the virginals, as if she said, 'Pick and choose.' They are no more
comparable to Lucy than an owl is to a cygnet, and so they may carry
their black brows to a farther market."

The entertainment being ended, our travellers, who had still to measure
the longest part of their journey, resumed their horses; and after the
Lord Keeper, the Master, and the domestics had drunk doch-an-dorroch,
or the stirrup-cup, in the liquors adapted to their various ranks, the
cavalcade resumed its progress.

It was dark by the time they entered the avenue of Ravenswood Castle, a
long straight line leading directly to the front of the house, flanked
with huge elm-trees, which sighed to the night-wind, as if they
compassionated the heir of their ancient proprietors, who now returned
to their shades in the society, and almost in the retinue, of their new
master. Some feelings of the same kind oppressed the mind of the Master
himself. He gradually became silent, adn dropped a little behind the
lady, at whose bridle-rein he had hitherto waited with such devotion.
He well recollected the period when, at the same hour in the evening, he
had accompanied his father, as that nobleman left, never again to
return to it, the mansion from which he derived his name and title. The
extensive front of the old castle, on which he remembered having often
looked back, was then "as black as mourning weed." The same front now
glanced with many lights, some throwing far forward into the night
a fixed and stationary blaze, and others hurrying from one window to
another, intimating the bustle and busy preparation preceding their
arrival, which had been intimated by an avant-courier. The contrast
pressed so strongly upon the Master's heart as to awaken some of the
sterner feelings with which he had been accustomed to regard the new
lord of his paternal domain, and to impress his countenance with an air
of severe gravity, when, alighted from his horse, he stood in the hall
no longer his own, surrounded by the numerous menials of its present
owner.

The Lord Keeper, when about to welcome him with the cordiality which
their late intercourse seemed to render proper, became aware of the
change, refrained from his purpose, and only intimated the ceremony of
reception by a deep reverence to his guest, seeming thus delicately to
share the feelings which predominated on his brow.

Two upper domestics, bearing each a huge pair of silver candlesticks,
now marshalled the company into a large saloon, or withdrawing-room,
where new alterations impressed upon Ravenswood the superior wealth of
the present inhabitants of the castle. The mouldering tapestry, which,
in his father's time, had half covered the walls of this stately
apartment, and half streamed from them in tatters, had given place to
a complete finishing of wainscot, the cornice of which, as well as the
frames of the various compartments, were ornamented with festoons of
flowers and with birds, which, though carved in oak, seemed, such was
the art of the chisel, actually to swell their throats and flutter their
wings. Several old family portraits of armed heroes of the house of
Ravenswood, together with a suit or two of old armour and some military
weapons, had given place to those of King William and Queen Mary, or
Sir Thomas Hope and Lord Stair, two distinguished Scottish lawyers. The
pictures of the Lord Keeper's father and mother were also to be seen;
the latter, sour, shrewish, and solemn, in her black hood and close
pinners, with a book of devotion in her hand; the former, exhibiting
beneath a black silk Geneva cowl, or skull-cap, which sate as close to
the head as if it had been shaven, a pinched, peevish, Puritanical set
of features, terminating in a hungry, reddish, peaked beard, forming on
the whole a countenance in the expression of which the hypocrite seemed
to contend with the miser and the knave. "And it is to make room for
such scarecrows as these," thought Ravenswood, "that my ancestors have
been torn down from the walls which they erected!" he looked at them
again, and, as he looked, the recollection of Lucy Ashton, for she
had not entered the apartment with them, seemed less lively in his
imagination. There were also two or three Dutch drolleries, as the
pictures of Ostade and Teniers were then termed, with one good painting
of the Italian school. There was, besides, a noble full-length of the
Lord Keeper in his robes of office, placed beside his lady in silk and
ermine, a haughty beauty, bearing in her looks all the pride of
the house of Douglas, from which she was descended. The painter,
notwithstanding his skill, overcome by the reality, or, perhaps, from a
suppressed sense of humour, had not been able to give the husband on the
canvas that air of awful rule and right supremacy which indicates the
full possession of domestic authority. It was obvious at the first
glance that, despite mace and gold frogs, the Lord Keeper was somewhat
henpecked. The floor of this fine saloon was laid with rich carpets,
huge fires blazed in the double chimneys, and ten silver sconces,
reflecting with their bright plates the lights which they supported,
made the whole seem as brilliant as day.

"Would you choose any refreshment, Master?" said Sir William Ashton, not
unwilling to break the awkward silence.

He received no answer, the Master being so busily engaged in marking the
various changes which had taken place in the apartment, that he
hardly heard the Lord Keeper address him. A repetition of the offer of
refreshment, with the addition, that the family meal would be presently
ready, compelled his attention, and reminded him that he acted a weak,
perhaps even a ridiculous, part in suffering himself to be overcome
by the circumstances in which he found himself. He compelled himself,
therefore, to enter into conversation with Sir William Ashton, with as
much appearance of indifference as he could well command.

"You will not be surprised, Sir William, that I am interested in the
changes you have made for the better in this apartment. In my father's
time, after our misfortunes compelled him to live in retirement, it was
little used, except by me as a play-room, when the weather would not
permit me to go abroad. In that recess was my little workshop, where I
treasured the few carpenters' tools which old Caleb procured for me,
and taught me how to use; there, in yonder corner, under that handsome
silver sconce, I kept my fishing-rods and hunting poles, bows and
arrows."

"I have a young birkie," said the Lord Keeper, willing to change the
tone of the conversation, "of much the same turn. He is never happy save
when he is in the field. I wonder he is not here. Here, Lockhard; send
William Shaw for Mr. Henry. I suppose he is, as usual, tied to Lucy's
apron-string; that foolish girl, Master, draws the whole family after
her at her pleasure."

Even this allusion to his daughter, though artfully thrown out, did not
recall Ravenswood from his own topic. "We were obliged to leave," he
said, "some armour and portraits in this apartment; may I ask where they
have been removed to?"

"Why," answered the Keeper, with some hesitation, "the room was fitted
up in our absence, and cedant arma togae is the maxim of lawyers, you
know: I am afraid it has been here somewhat too literally complied with.
I hope--I believe they are safe, I am sure I gave orders; may I hope
that when they are recovered, and put in proper order, you will do
me the honour to accept them at my hand, as an atonement for their
accidental derangement?"

The Master of Ravenswood bowed stiffly, and, with folded arms, again
resumed his survey of the room.

Henry, a spoilt boy of fifteen, burst into the room, and ran up to
his father. "Think of Lucy, papa; she has come home so cross and so
fractious, that she will not go down to the stable to see my new pony,
that Bob Wilson brought from the Mull of Galloway."

"I think you were very unreasonable to ask her," said the Keeper.

"Then you are as cross as she is," answered the boy; "but when mamma
comes home, she'll claw up both your mittens."

"Hush your impertinence, you little forward imp!" said his father;
"where is your tutor?"

"Gone to a wedding at Dunbar; I hope he'll get a haggis to his dinner";
and he began to sing the old Scottish song:

"There was a haggis in Dunbar, Fal de ral, etc. Mony better and few
waur, Fal de ral," etc.

"I am much obliged to Mr. Cordery for his attentions," said the Lord
Keeper; "and pray who has had the charge of you while I was away, Mr.
Henry?"

"Norman and Bob Wilson, forbye my own self."

"A groom and a gamekeeper, and your own silly self--proper guardians
for a young advocate! Why, you will never know any statutes but those
against shooting red-deer, killing salmon, and----"

"And speaking of red-game," said the young scapegrace, interrupting his
father without scruple or hesitation, "Norman has shot a buck, and I
showed the branches to Lucy, and she says they have but eight tynes; and
she says that you killed a deer with Lord Bittlebrains's hounds, when
you were west away, and, do you know, she says it had ten tynes; is it
true?"

"It may have had twenty, Henry, for what I know; but if you go to that
gentleman, he can tell you all about it. Go speak to him, Henry; it is
the Master of Ravenswood."

While they conversed thus, the father and son were standing by the fire;
and the Master, having walked towards the upper end of the apartment,
stood with his back towards them, apparently engaged in examining one of
the paintings. The boy ran up to him, and pulled him by the skirt of
the coat with the freedom of a spoilt child, saying, "I say, sir, if you
please to tell me----" but when the Master turned round, and Henry saw
his face, he became suddenly and totally disconcerted; walked two or
three steps backward, and still gazed on Ravenswood with an air of fear
and wonder, which had totally banished from his features their usual
expression of pert vivacity.

"Come to me, young gentleman," said the Master, "and I will tell you all
I know about the hunt."

"Go to the gentleman, Henry," said his father; "you are not used to be
so shy."

But neither invitation nor exhortation had any effect on the boy. On the
contrary, he turned round as soon as he had completed his survey of the
Master, and walking as cautiously as if he had been treading upon eggs,
he glided back to his father, and pressed as close to him as possible.
Ravenswood, to avoid hearing the dispute betwixt the father and the
overindulged boy, thought it most polite to turn his face once more
towards the pictures, and pay no attention to what they said.

"Why do you not speak to the Master, you little fool?" said the Lord
Keeper.

"I am afraid," said Henry, in a very low tone of voice.

"Afraid, you goose!" said his father, giving him a slight shake by the
collar. "What makes you afraid?"

"What makes him to like the picture of Sir Malise Ravenswood then?" said
the boy, whispering.

"What picture, you natural?" said his father. "I used to think you only
a scapegrace, but I believe you will turn out a born idiot."

"I tell you, it is the picture of old Malise of Ravenswood, and he is as
like it as if he had loupen out of the canvas; and it is up in the old
baron's hall that the maids launder the clothes in; and it has armour,
and not a coat like the gentleman; and he has not a beard and whiskers
like the picture; and it has another kind of thing about the throat, and
no band-strings as he has; and----"

"And why should not the gentleman be like his ancestor, you silly boy?"
said the Lord Keeper.

"Ay; but if he is come to chase us all out of the castle," said the boy,
"and has twenty men at his back in disguise; and is come to say, with
a hollow voice, 'I bide my time'; and is to kill you on the hearth as
Malise did the other man, and whose blood is still to be seen!"

"Hush! nonsense!" said the Lord Keeper, not himself much pleased to hear
these disagreeable coincidences forced on his notice. "Master, here comes
Lockhard to say supper is served."

And, at the same instant, Lucy entered at another door, having changed
her dress since her return. The exquisite feminine beauty of her
countenance, now shaded only by a profusion of sunny tresses; the
sylph-like form, disencumbered of her heavy riding-skirt and mantled in
azure silk; the grace of her manner and of her smile, cleared, with
a celerity which surprised the Master himself, all the gloomy and
unfavourable thoughts which had for some time overclouded his fancy.
In those features, so simply sweet, he could trace no alliance with
the pinched visage of the peak-bearded, black-capped Puritan, or his
starched, withered spouse, with the craft expressed in the Lord Keeper's
countenance, or the haughtiness which predominated in that of his lady;
and, while he gazed on Lucy Ashton, she seemed to be an angel descended
on earth, unallied to the coarses mortals among whom she deigned to
dwell for a season. Such is the power of beauty over a youthful and
enthusiastic fancy.




CHAPTER XIX.

     I do too ill in this,
     And must not think but that a parent's plaint
     Will move the heavens to pour forth misery
     Upon the head of disobediency.
     Yet reason tells us, parents are o'erseen,
     When with too strict a rein they do hold in
     Their child's affection, and control that love,
     Which the high powers divine inspire them with.

     The Hog hath lost his Pearl.


THE feast of Ravenswood Castle was as remarkable for its profusion as
that of Wolf's Crag had been for its ill-veiled penury. The Lord Keeper
might feel internal pride at the contrast, but he had too much tact
to suffer it to appear. On the contrary, he seemed to remember with
pleasure what he called Mr. Balderstone's bachelor's meal, and to be
rather disgusted than pleaseed with the display upon his own groaning
board.

"We do these things," he said, "because others do them; but I was bred
a plain man at my father's frugal table, and I should like well would
my wife and family permit me to return to my sowens and my
poor-man-of-mutton."

This was a little overstretched. The Master only answered, "That
different ranks--I mean," said he, correcting himself, "different
degrees of wealth require a different style of housekeeping."

This dry remark put a stop to further conversation on the subject, nor
is it necessary to record that which was substituted in its place. The
evening was spent with freedom, and even cordiality; and Henry had so
far overcome his first apprehensions, that he had settled a party for
coursing a stag with the representative and living resemblance of grim
Sir Malise of Ravenswood, called the Revenger. The next morning was the
appointed time. It rose upon active sportsmen and successful sport. The
banquet came in course; and a pressing invitation to tarry yet another
day was given and accepted. This Ravenswood had resolved should be the
last of his stay; but he recollected he had not yet visited the ancient
and devoted servant of his house, Old Alice, and it was but kind to
dedicate one morning to the gratification of so ancient an adherent.

To visit Alice, therefore, a day was devoted, and Lucy was the Master's
guide upon the way. Henry, it is true, accompanied them, and took from
their walk the air of a tete-a-tete, while, in reality, it was little
else, considering the variety of circumstances which occurred to prevent
the boy from giving the least attention to what passed between his
companions. Now a rook settled on a branch within shot; anon a hare
crossed their path, and Henry and his greyhound went astray in pursuit
of it; then he had to hold a long conversation with the forester, which
detained him a while behind his companions; and again he went to examine
the earth of a badger, which carried him on a good way before them.

The conversation betwixt the Master and his sister, meanwhile, took
an interesting, and almost a confidential, turn. She could not help
mentioning her sense of the pain he must feel in visiting scenes so well
known to him, bearing now an aspect so different; and so gently was
her sympathy expressed, that Ravenswood felt it for a moment as a full
requital of all his misfortunes. Some such sentiment escaped him, which
Lucy heard with more of confusion than displeasure; and she may be
forgiven the imprudence of listening to such language, considering that
the situation in which she was placed by her father seemed to authorise
Ravenswood to use it. Yet she made an effort to turn the conversation,
and she succeeded; for the Master also had advanced farther than he
intended, and his conscience had instantly checked him when he found
himself on the verge of speaking of love to the daughter of Sir William
Ashton.

They now approached the hut of Old Alice, which had of late been
rendered more comfortable, and presented an appearance less picturesque,
perhaps, but far neater than before. The old woman was on her accustomed
seat beneath the weeping birch, basking, with the listless enjoyment of
age and infirmity, in the beams of the autumn sun. At the arrival of
her visitors she turned her head towards them. "I hear your step, Miss
Ashton," she said, "but the gentleman who attends you is not my lord,
your father."

"And why should you think so, Alice?" said Lucy; "or how is it possible
for you to judge so accurately by the sound of a step, on this firm
earth, and in the open air?"

"My hearing, my child, has been sharpened by my blindness, and I can now
draw conclusions from the slightest sounds, which formerly reached my
ears as unheeded as they now approach yours. Necessity is a stern but an
excellent schoolmistress, and she that has lost her sight must collect
her information from other sources."

"Well, you hear a man's step, I grant it," said Lucy; "but why, Alice,
may it not be my father's?"

"The pace of age, my love, is timid and cautious: the foot takes leave
of the earth slowly, and is planted down upon it with hesitation; it
is the hasty and determined step of youth that I now hear, and--could I
give credit to so strange a thought--I should say is was the step of a
Ravenswood."

"This is indeed," said Ravenswood, "an acuteness of organ which I could
not have credited had I not witnessed it. I am indeed the Master of
Ravenswood, Alice,--the son of your old master."

"You!" said the old woman, with almost a scream of surprise--"you the
Master of Ravenswood--here--in this place, and thus accompanied! I
cannot believe it. Let me pass my old hand over your face, that my touch
may bear witness to my ears."

The Master sate down beside her on the earthen bank, and permitted her
to touch his features with her trembling hand.

"It is indeed!" she said--"it is the features as well as the voice of
Ravenswood--the high lines of pride, as well as the bold and haughty
tone. But what do you here, Master of Ravenswood?--what do you in your
enemy's domain, and in company with his child?" As Old Alice spoke, her
face kindled, as probably that of an ancient feudal vassal might have
done in whose presence his youthful liege-lord had showed some symptom
of degenerating from the spirit of his ancestors.

"The Master of Ravenswood," said Lucy, who liked not the tone of this
expostulation, and was desirous to abridge it, "is upon a visit to my
father."

"Indeed!" said the old blind woman, in an accent of surprise.

"I knew," continued Lucy, "I should do him a pleasure by conducting him
to your cottage."

"Where, to say the truth, Alice," said Ravenswood, "I expected a more
cordial reception."

"It is most wonderful!" said the old woman, muttering to herself; "but
the ways of Heaven are not like our ways, and its judgments are brought
about by means far beyond our fathoming. Hearken, young man," she said;
"your fathers were implacable, but they were honourable, foes; they
sought not to ruin their enemies under the mask of hospitality. What
have you to do with Lucy Ashton? why should your steps move in the same
footpath with hers? why should your voice sound in the same chord and
time with those of Sir William Ashton's daughter? Young man, he who aims
at revenge by dishonourable means----"

"Be silent, woman!" said Ravenswood, sternly; "it is the devil that
prompts your voice? Know that this young lady has not on earth a friend
who would venture farther to save her from injury or from insult."

"And is it even so?" said the old woman, in an altered but melancholy
tone, "then God help you both!"

"Amen! Alice," said Lucy, who had not comprehended the import of what
the blind woman had hinted, "and send you your senses, Alice, and your
good humour. If you hold this mysterious language, instead of welcoming
your friends, they will think of you as other people do."

"And how do other people think?" said Ravenswood, for he also began to
believe the old woman spoke with incoherence.

"They think," said Henry Ashton, who came up at that moment, and
whispered into Ravenswood's ear, "that she is a witch, that should have
been burned with them that suffered at Haddington."

"What is it you say?" said Alice, turning towards the boy, her sightless
visage inflamed with passion; "that I am a witch, and ought to
have suffered with the helpless old wretches who were murdered at
Haddington?"

"Hear to that now," again whispered Henry, "and me whispering lower than
a wren cheeps!"

"If the usurer, and the oppressor, and the grinder of the poor man's
face, and the remover of ancient landmarks, and the subverter of ancient
houses, were at the same stake with me, I could say, 'Light the fire, in
God's name!'"

"This is dreadful," said Lucy; "I have never seen the poor deserted
woman in this state of mind; but age and poverty can ill bear reproach.
Come, Henry, we will leave her for the present; she wishes to speak
with the Master alone. We will walk homeward, and rest us," she added,
looking at Ravenswood, "by the Mermaiden's Well." "And Alice," said the
boy, "if you know of any hare that comes through among the deer, and
makes them drop their calves out of season, you may tell her, with my
compliments to command, that if Norman has not got a silver bullet ready
for her, I'll lend him one of my doublet-buttons on purpose."

Alice made no answer till she was aware that the sister and brother were
out of hearing. She then said to Ravenswood: "And you, too, are angry
with me for my love? It is just that strangers should be offended, but
you, too, are angry!"

"I am not angry, Alice," said the Master, "only surprised that you,
whose good sense I have heard so often praised, should give way to
offensive and unfounded suspicions."

"Offensive!" said Alice. "Ay, trust is ever offensive; but, surely, not
unfounded."

"I tell you, dame, most groundless," replied Ravenswood.

"Then the world has changed its wont, and the Ravenswoods their
hereditary temper, and the eyes of Old Alice's understanding are yet
more blind than those of her countenance. When did a Ravenswood seek the
house of his enemy but with the purpose of revenge? and hither are you
come, Edgar Ravenswood, either in fatal anger or in still more fatal
love."

"In neither," said Ravenswood, "I give you mine honour--I mean, I assure
you."

Alice could not see his blushing cheek, but she noticed his hesitation,
and that he retracted the pledge which he seemed at first disposed to
attach to his denial.

"It is so, then," she said, "and therefore she is to tarry by the
Mermaiden's Well! Often has it been called a place fatal to the race of
Ravenswood--often has it proved so; but never was it likely to verify
old sayings as much as on this day."

"You drive me to madness, Alice," said Ravenswood; "you are more silly
and more superstitious than old Balderstone. Are you such a wretched
Christian as to suppose I would in the present day levy war against the
Ashton family, as was the sanguinary custom in elder times? or do you
suppose me so foolish, that I cannot walk by a young lady's side without
plunging headlong in love with her?"

"My thoughts," replied Alice, "are my own; and if my mortal sight
is closed to objects present with me, it may be I can look with more
steadiness into future events. Are you prepared to sit lowest at the
board which was once your father's own, unwillingly, as a connexion and
ally of his proud successor? Are you ready to live on his bounty; to
follow him in the bye-paths of intrigue and chicane, which none can
better point out to you; to gnaw the bones of his prey when he has
devoured the substance? Can you say as Sir William Ashton says, think
as he thinks, vote as he votes, and call your father's murderer your
worshipful father-in-law and revered patron? Master of Ravenswood, I am
the eldest servant of your house, and I would rather see you shrouded
and coffined!"

The tumult in Ravenswood's mind was uncommonly great; she struck upon
and awakened a chord which he had for some time successfully silenced.
He strode backwards and forwards through the little garden with a hasty
pace; and at length checking himself, and stopping right opposite to
Alice, he exclaimed: "Woman! on the verge of the grave, dare you urge
the son of your master to blood and to revenge?"

"God forbid!" said Alice, solemnly; "and therefore I would have you
depart these fatal bounds, where your love, as well as your hatred,
threatens sure mischief, or at least disgrace, both to yourself and
others. I would shield, were it in the power of this withered hand, the
Ashtons from you, and you from them, and both from their own passions.
You can have nothing--ought to have nothing, in common with them. Begone
from among them; and if God has destined vengeance on the oppressor's
house, do not you be the instrument."

"I will think on what you have said, Alice," said Ravenswood, more
composedly. "I believe you mean truly and faithfully by me, but you urge
the freedom of an ancient domestic somewhat too far. But farewell; and
if Heaven afford me better means, I will not fail to contribute to your
comfort."

He attempted to put a piece of gold into her hand, which she refused to
receive; and, in the slight struggle attending his wish to force it upon
her, it dropped to the earth.

"Let it remain an instant on the ground," said Alice, as the Master
stooped to raise it; "and believe me, that piece of gold is an emblem of
her whom you love; she is as precious, I grant, but you must stoop even
to abasement before you can win her. For me, I have as little to do with
gold as with earthly passions; and the best news that the world has in
store for me is, that Edgar Ravenswood is an hundred miles distant from
the seat of his ancestors, with the determination never again to behold
it."

"Alice," said the Master, who began to think this earnestness had some
more secret cause than arose from anything that the blind woman could
have gathered from this casual visit, "I have heard you praised by my
mother for your sense, acuteness, and fidelity; you are no fool to start
at shadows, or to dread old superstitious saws, like Caleb Balderstone;
tell me distinctly where my danger lies, if you are aware of any which
is tending towards me. If I know myself, I am free from all such views
respecting Miss Ashton as you impute to me. I have necessary business
to settle with Sir William; that arranged, I shall depart, and with as
little wish, as you may easily believe, to return to a place full of
melancholy subjects of reflection, as you have to see me here." Alice
bent her sightless eyes on the ground, and was for some time plunged in
deep meditation. "I will speak the truth," she said at length, raising
up her head--"I will tell you the source of my apprehensions, whether
my candour be for good or for evil. Lucy Ashton loves you, Lord of
Ravenswood!"

"It is impossible," said the Master.

"A thousand circumstances have proved it to me," replied the blind
woman. "Her thoughts have turned on no one else since you saved her
from death, and that my experienced judgment has won from her own
conversation. Having told you this--if you are indeed a gentleman
and your father's son--you will make it a motive for flying from her
presence. Her passion will die like a lamp for want of that the flame
should feed upon; but, if you remain here, her destruction, or yours,
or that of both, will be the inevitable consequence of her misplaced
attachment. I tell you this secret unwillingly, but it could not have
been hid long from your own observation, and it is better you learn
it from mine. Depart, Master of Ravenswood; you have my secret. If you
remain an hour under Sir William Ashton's roof without the resolution
to marry his daughter, you are a villain; if with the purpose of allying
yourself with kin, you are an infatuated and predestined fool."

So saying, the old blind woman arose, assumed her staff, and, tottering
to her hut, entered it and closed the door, leaving Ravenswood to his
own reflections.




CHAPTER XX.

     Lovelier in her own retired abode
     ....than Naiad by the side
     Of Grecian brook--or Lady of the Mere
     Lone sitting by the shores of old romance.

     WORDSWORTH.

THE meditations of Ravenswood were of a very mixed complexion. He saw
himself at once in the very dilemma which he had for some time felt
apprehensive he might be placed in. The pleasure he felt in Lucy's
company had indeed approached to fascination, yet it had never
altogether surmounted his internal reluctance to wed with the daughter
of his father's foe; and even in forgiving Sir William Ashton the
injuries which his family had received, and giving him credit for the
kind intentions he professed to entertain, he could not bring himself to
contemplate as possible an alliance betwixt their houses. Still, he felt
that Alice poke truth, and that his honour now required he should
take an instant leave of Ravenswood Castle, or become a suitor of Lucy
Ashton. The possibility of being rejected, too, should he make advances
to her wealthy and powerful father--to sue for the hand of an Ashton and
be refused--this were a consummation too disgraceful. "I wish her well,"
he said to himself, "and for her sake I forgive the injuries her father
has done to my house; but I will never--no, never see her more!"

With one bitter pang he adopted this resolution, just as he came to
where two paths parted: the one to the Mermaiden's Fountain, where he
knew Lucy waited him, the other leading to the castle by another and
more circuitous road. He paused an instant when about to take the latter
path, thinking what apology he should make for conduct which must needs
seem extraordinary, and had just muttered to himself, "Sudden news from
Edinburgh--any pretext will serve; only let me dally no longer here,"
when young Henry came flying up to him, half out of breath: "Master,
Master you must give Lucy your arm back to the castle, for I cannot give
her mine; for Norman is waiting for me, and I am to go with him to make
his ring-walk, and I would not stay away for a gold Jacobus; and Lucy is
afraid to walk home alone, though all the wild nowt have been shot, and
so you must come away directly."

Betwixt two scales equally loaded, a feather's weight will turn the
scale. "It is impossible for me to leave the young lady in the wood
alone," said Ravenswood; "to see her once more can be of little
consequence, after the frequent meetings we have had. I ought, too, in
courtesy, to apprise her of my intention to quit the castle."

And having thus satisfied himself that he was taking not only a wise,
but an absolutely necessary, step, he took the path to the fatal
fountain. Henry no sooner saw him on the way to join his sister than he
was off like lightning in another direction, to enjoy the society of the
forester in their congenial pursuits. Ravenswood, not allowing himself
to give a second thought to the propriety of his own conduct, walked
with a quick step towards the stream, where he found Lucy seated alone
by the ruin.

She sate upon one of the disjointed stones of the ancient fountain,
and seemed to watch the progress of its current, as it bubbled forth to
daylight, in gay and sparkling profusion, from under the shadow of the
ribbed and darksome vault, with which veneration, or perhaps remorse,
had canopied its source. To a superstitious eye, Lucy Ashton, folded in
her plaided mantle, with her long hair, escaping partly from the snood
and falling upon her silver neck, might have suggested the idea of
the murdered Nymph of the fountain. But Ravenswood only saw a female
exquisitely beautiful, and rendered yet more so in his eyes--how
could it be otherwise?--by the consciousness that she had placed her
affections on him. As he gazed on her, he felt his fixed resolution
melting like wax in the sun, and hastened, therefore, from his
concealment in the neighbouring thicket. She saluted him, but did not
arise from the stone on which she was seated.

"My madcap brother," she said, "has left me, but I expect him back in
a few minutes; for, fortunately, as anything pleases him for a minute,
nothing has charms for him much longer."

Ravenswood did not feel the power of informing Lucy that her brother
meditated a distant excursion, and would not return in haste. He sate
himself down on the grass, at some little distance from Miss Ashton, and
both were silent for a short space.

"I like this spot," said Lucy at length, as if she found the silence
embarrassing; "the bubbling murmur of the clear fountain, the waving of
the trees, the profusion of grass and wild-flowers that rise among the
ruins, make it like a scene in romance. I think, too, I have heard it is
a spot connected with the legendary lore which I love so well."

"It has been thought," answered Ravenswood, "a fatal spot to my family;
and I have some reason to term it so, for it was here I first saw Miss
Ashton; and it is here I must take my leave of her for ever."

The blood, which the first part of this speech called into Lucy's
cheeks, was speedily expelled by its conclusion.

"To take leave of us, Master!" she exclaimed; "what can have happened
to hurry you away? I know Alice hates--I mean dislikes my father; and
I hardly understood her humour to-day, it was so mysterious. But I
am certain my father is sincerely grateful for the high service you
rendered us. Let me hope that, having won your friendship hardly, we
shall not lose it lightly."

"Lose it, Miss Ashton!" said the Master of Ravenswood. "No; wherever my
fortune calls me--whatever she inflicts upon me--it is your friend--your
sincere friend, who acts or suffers. But there is a fate on me, and I
must go, or I shall add the ruin of others to my own."

"Yet do not go from us, Master," said Lucy; and she laid her hand,
in all simplicity and kindness, upon the skirt of his cloak, as if to
detain him. "You shall not part from us. My father is powerful, he has
friends that are more so than himself; do not go till you see what his
gratitude will do for you. Believe me, he is already labouring in your
behalf with the council."

"It may be so," said the Master, proudly; "yet it is not to your father,
Miss Ashton, but to my own exertions, that I ought to owe success in the
career on which I am about to enter. My preparations are already made--a
sword and a cloak, and a bold heart and a determined hand."

Lucy covered her face her hands, and the tears, in spite of her, forced
their way between her fingers.

"Forgive me," said Ravenswood, taking her right hand, which, after
slight resistance, she yielded to him, still continuing to shade her
face with the left--"I am too rude--too rough--too intractable to deal
with any being so soft and gentle as you are. Forget that so stern a
vision has crossed your path of life; and let me pursue mine, sure that
I can meet with no worse misfortune after the moment it divides me from
your side."

Lucy wept on, but her tears were less bitter. Each attempt which the
Master made to explain his purpose of departure only proved a new
evidence of his desire to stay; until, at length, instead of bidding her
farewell, he gave his faith to her for ever, and received her troth
in return. The whole passed so suddenly, and arose so much out of the
immediate impulse of the moment, that ere the Master of Ravenswood could
reflect upon the consequences of the step which he had taken, their
lips, as well as their hands, had pledged the sincerity of their
affection.

"And now," he said, after a moment's consideration, "it is fit I should
speak to Sir William Ashton; he must know of our engagement. Ravenswood
must not seem to dwell under his roof to solicit clandestinely the
affections of his daughter."

"You would not speak to my father on the subject?" said Lucy,
doubtingly; and then added more warmly: "Oh do not--do not! Let your lot
in life be determined--your station and purpose ascertained, before you
address my father. I am sure he loves you--I think he will consent; but
then my mother----!"

She paused, ashamed to express the doubt she felt how far her father
dared to form any positive resolution on this most important subject
without the consent of his lady.

"Your mother, my Lucy!" replied Ravenswood. "She is of the house of
Douglas, a house that has intermarried with mine even when its glory
and power were at the highest; what could your mother object to my
alliance?"

"I did not say object," said Lucy; "but she is jealous of her rights,
and may claim a mother's title to be consulted in the first instance."

"Be it so," replied Ravenswood. "London is distant, but a letter will
reach it and receive an answer within a fortnight; I will not press on
the Lord Keeper for an instant reply to my proposal."

"But," hesitated Lucy, "were it not better to wait--to wait a few weeks?
Were my mother to see you--to know you, I am sure she would approve;
but you are unacquainted personally, and the ancient feud between the
families----"

Ravenswood fixed upon her his keen dark eyes, as if he was desirous of
penetrating into her very soul.

"Lucy," he said, "I have sacrificed to you projects of vengeance long
nursed, and sworn to with ceremonies little better than heathen--I
sacrificed them to your image, ere I knew the worth which it
represented. In the evening which succeeded my poor father's funeral, I
cut a lock from my hair, and, as it consumed in the fire, I swore that
my rage and revenge should pursue his enemies, until they shrivelled
before me like that scorched-up symbol of annihilation."

"It was a deadly sin," said Lucy, turning pale, "to make a vow so
fatal."

"I acknowledge it," said Ravenswood, "and it had been a worse crime
to keep it. It was for your sake that I abjured these purposes of
vengeance, though I scarce knew that such was the argument by which I
was conquered, until I saw you once more, and became conscious of the
influence you possessed over me."

"And why do you now," said Lucy, "recall sentiments so
terrible--sentiments so inconsistent with those you profess for me--with
those your importunity has prevailed on me to acknowledge?"

"Because," said her lover, "I would impress on you the price at which I
have bought your love--the right I have to expect your constancy. I
say not that I have bartered for it the honour of my house, its last
remaining possession; but though I say it not, and think it not, I
cannot conceal from myself that the world may do both."

"If such are your sentiments," said Lucy, "you have played a cruel game
with me. But it is not too late to give it over: take back the faith and
troth which you could not plight to me without suffering abatement of
honour--let what is passed be as if it had not been--forget me; I will
endeavour to forget myself."

"You do me injustice," said the Master of Ravenswood--"by all I
hold true and honourable, you do me the extremity of injustice; if I
mentioned the price at which I have bought your love, it is only to show
how much I prize it, to bind our engagement by a still firmer tie, and
to show, by what I have done to attain this station in your regard, how
much I must suffer should you ever break your faith."

"And why, Ravenswood," answered Lucy, "should you think that possible?
Why should you urge me with even the mention of infidelity? Is it
because I ask you to delay applying to my father for a little space of
time? Bind me by what vows you please; if vows are unnecessary to
secure constancy, they may yet prevent suspicion." Ravenswood pleaded,
apologised, and even kneeled, to appease her displeasure; and Lucy, as
placable as she was single-hearted, readily forgave the offence which
his doubts had implied. The dispute thus agitated, however, ended by the
lovers going through an emblematic ceremony of their troth-plight, of
which the vulgar still preserve some traces. They broke betwixt them
the thin broad-piece of gold which Alice had refused to receive from
Ravenswood.

"And never shall this leave my bosom," said Lucy, as she hung the piece
of gold round her neck, and concealed it with her handkerchief, "until
you, Edgar Ravenswood, ask me to resign it to you; and, while I wear it,
never shall that heart acknowledge another love than yours."

With like protestations, Ravenswood placed his portion of the coin
opposite to his heart. And now, at length, it struck them that time had
hurried fast on during this interview, and their absence at the castle
would be subject of remark, if not of alarm. As they arose to leave the
fountain which had been witness of their mutual engagement, an arrow
whistled through the air, and struck a raven perched on the sere branch
of an old oak, near to where they had been seated. The bird fluttered a
few yards and dropped at the feet of Lucy, whose dress was stained with
some spots of its blood.

Miss Ashton was much alarmed, and Ravenswood, surprised and angry,
looked everywhere for the marksman, who had given them a proof of his
skill as little expected as desired. He was not long of discovering
himself, being no other than Henry Ashton, who came running up with a
crossbow in his hand.

"I knew I should startle you," he said; "and do you know, you looked so
busy that I hoped it would have fallen souse on your heads before you
were aware of it. What was the Master saying to you, Lucy?"

"I was telling your sister what an idle lad you were, keeping us waiting
here for you so long," said Ravenswood, to save Lucy's confusion.

"Waiting for me! Why, I told you to see Lucy home, and that I was to go
to make the ring-walk with old Norman in the Hayberry thicket, and you
may be sure that would take a good hour, and we have all the deer's
marks and furnishes got, while you were sitting here with Lucy, like a
lazy loon."

"Well, well, Mr. Henry," said Ravenswood; "but let us see how you will
answer to me for killing the raven. Do you know, the ravens are all
under the protection of the Lords of Ravenswood, and to kill one in
their presence is such bad luck that it deserves the stab?"

"And that's what Norman said," replied the boy; "he came as far with
me as within a flight-shot of you, and he said he never saw a raven sit
still so near living folk, and he wished it might be for good luck, for
the raven is one of the wildest birds that flies, unless it be a tame
one; and so I crept on and on, till I was within threescore yards of
him, and then whiz went the bolt, and there he lies, faith! Was it not
well shot? and, I dare say, I have not shot in a crossbow!--not ten
times, maybe."

"Admirably shot, indeed," said Ravenswood; "and you will be a fine
marksman if you practise hard."

"And that's what Norman says," answered the boy; "but I am sure it is
not my fault if I do not practise enough; for, of free will, I would do
little else, only my father and tutor are angry sometimes, and only Miss
Lucy there gives herself airs about my being busy, for all she can
sit idle by a well-side the whole day, when she has a handsome young
gentleman to prate with. I have known her do so twenty times, if you
will believe me."

The boy looked at his sister as he spoke, and, in the midst of his
mischievous chatter, had the sense to see that he was really inflicting
pain upon her, though without being able to comprehend the cause or the
amount.

"Come now, Lucy," he said, "don't greet; and if I have said anything
beside the mark, I'll deny it again; and what does the Master of
Ravenswood care if you had a hundred sweethearts? so ne'er put finger in
your eye about it."

The Master of Ravenswood was, for the moment, scarce satisfied with what
he heard; yet his good sense naturally regarded it as the chatter of a
spoilt boy, who strove to mortify his sister in the point which seemed
most accessible for the time. But, although of a temper equally slow in
receiving impressions and obstinate in retaining them, the prattle
of Henry served to nourish in his mind some vague suspicion that his
present engagement might only end in his being exposed, like a conquered
enemy in a Roman triumph, a captive attendant on the car of a victor who
meditated only the satiating his pride at the expense of the
vanquished. There was, we repeat it, no real ground whatever for such
an apprehension, nor could he be said seriously to entertain such for a
moment. Indeed, it was impossible to look at the clear blue eye of
Lucy Ashton, and entertain the slightest permanent doubt concerning
the sincerity of her disposition. Still, however, conscious pride and
conscious poverty combined to render a mind suspicious which in more
fortunate circumstances would have been a stranger to that as well as to
every other meanness.

They reached the castle, where Sir William Ashton, who had been alarmed
by the length of their stay, met them in the hall.

"Had Lucy," he said, "been in any other company than that of one who had
shown he had so complete power of protecting her, he confessed he should
have been very uneasy, and would have despatched persons in quest of
them. But, in the company of the Master of Ravenswood, he knew his
daughter had nothing to dread." Lucy commenced some apology for their
long delay, but, conscience-struck, becames confused as she proceeded;
and when Ravenswood, coming to her assistance, endeavoured to render the
explanation complete and satisfactory, he only involved himself in the
same disorder, like one who, endeavouring to extricate his companion
from a slough, entangles himself in the same tenacious swamp. It cannot
be supposed that the confusion of the two youthful lovers escaped the
observation of the subtle lawyer, accustomed, by habit and profession,
to trace human nature through all her windings. But it was not his
present policy to take any notice of what he observed. He desired to
hold the Master of Ravenswood bound, but wished that he himself should
remain free; and it did not occur to him that his plan might be defeated
by Lucy's returning the passion which he hoped she might inspire. If
she should adopt some romantic feelings towards Ravenswood, in which
circumstances, or the positive and absolute opposition of Lady Ashton,
might render it unadvisable to indulge her, the Lord Keeper conceived
they might be easily superseded and annulled by a journey to Edinburgh,
or even to London, a new set of Brussels lace, and the soft whispers of
half a dozen lovers, anxious to replace him whom it was convenient she
should renounce. This was his provision for the worst view of the case.
But, according to its more probable issue, any passing favours she
might entertain for the Master of Ravenswood might require encouragement
rather than repression.

This seemed the more likely, as he had that very morning, since their
departure from the castle, received a letter, the contents of which he
hastened to communicate to Ravenswood. A foot-post had arrived with
a packet to the Lord Keeper from that friend whom we have already
mentioned, who was labouring hard underhand to consolidate a band of
patriots, at the head of whom stood Sir William's greatest terror, the
active and ambitious Marquis of A----. The success of this convenient
friend had been such, that he had obtained from Sir William, not indeed
a directly favourable answer, but certainly a most patient hearing. This
he had reported to his principal, who had replied by the ancient French
adage, "Chateau qui parle, et femme qui ecoute, l'un et l'autre va se
rendre." A statesman who hears you propose a change of measures without
reply was, according to the Marquis's opinion, in the situation of the
fortress which parleys and the lady who listens, and he resolved to
press the siege of the Lord Keeper.

The packet, therefore, contained a letter from his friend and ally,
and another from himself, to the Lord Keeper, frankly offering an
unceremonious visit. They were crossing the country to go to the
southward; the roads were indifferent; the accommodation of the inns
as execrable as possible; the Lord Keeper had been long acquainted
intimately with one of his correspondents, and, though more slightly
known to the Marquis, had yet enough of his lordship's acquaintance to
render the visit sufficiently natural, and to shut the mouths of those
who might be disposed to impute it to a political intrigue. He instantly
accepted the offered visit, determined, however, that he would not
pledge himself an inch farther for the furtherance of their views than
REASON (by which he meant his own self-interest) should plainly point
out to him as proper.

Two circumstances particularly delighted him--the presence of
Ravenswood, and the absence of his own lady. By having the former under
his roof, he conceived he might be able to quash all such hazardous and
hostile proceedings as he might otherwise have been engaged in, under
the patronage of the Marquis; and Lucy, he foresaw, would make, for his
immediate purpose of delay and procrastination, a much better mistress
of his family than her mother, who would, he was sure, in some shape
or other, contrive to disconcert his political schemes by her proud and
implacable temper.

His anxious solicitations that the Master would stay to receive
his kinsman, were, of course, readily complied with, since the
eclaircissement which had taken place at the Mermaiden's Fountain
had removed all wish for sudden departure. Lucy and Lockhard, had,
therefore, orders to provide all things necessary in their different
departments, for receiving the expected guests with a pomp and display
of luxury very uncommon in Scotland at that remote period.




CHAPTER XXI.

     Marall: Sir, the man of honour's come,
     Newly alighted----Overreach: In without reply,
     And do as I command....
     Is the loud music I gave order for
     Ready to receive him?

     New Way to pay Old Debts.

SIR WILLIAM ASHTON, although a man of sense, legal information, and
great practical knowledge of the world, had yet some points of character
which corresponded better with the timidity of his disposition and the
supple arts by which he had risen in the world, than to the degree
of eminence which he had attained; as they tended to show an original
mediocrity of understanding, however highly it had been cultivated, and
a native meanness of disposition, however carefully veiled. He loved the
ostentatious display of his wealth, less as a man to whom habit has
made it necessary, than as one to whom it is still delightful from its
novelty. The most trivial details did not escape him; and Lucy soon
learned to watch the flush of scorn which crossed Ravenswood's cheek,
when he heard her father gravely arguing with Lockhard, nay, even with
the old housekeeper, upon circumstances which, in families of rank,
are left uncared for, because it is supposed impossible they can be
neglected.

"I could pardon Sir William," said Ravenswood, one evening after he
had left the room, "some general anxiety upon this occasion, for the
Marquis's visit is an honour, and should be received as such; but I am
worn out by these miserable minutiae of the buttery, and the larder,
and the very hencoop--they drive me beyond my patience; I would rather
endure the poverty of Wolf's Crag than be pestered with the wealth of
Ravenswood Castle."

"And yet," said Lucy, "it was by attention to these minutiae that my
father acquired the property----"

"Which my ancestors sold for lack of it," replied Ravenswood. "Be it so;
a porter still bears but a burden, though the burden be of gold."

Lucy sighed; she perceived too plainly that her lover held in scorn the
manners and habits of a father to whom she had long looked up as her
best and most partial friend, whose fondness had often consoled her for
her mother's contemptuous harshness.

The lovers soon discovered that they differed upon other and no less
important topics. Religion, the mother of peace, was, in those days of
discord, so much misconstrued and mistaken, that her rules and forms
were the subject of the most opposite opinions and the most hostile
animosities. The Lord Keeper, being a Whig, was, of course, a
Presbyterian, and had found it convenient, at different periods, to
express greater zeal for the kirk than perhaps he really felt. His
family, equally of course, were trained under the same institution.
Ravenswood, as we know, was a High Churchman, or Episcopalian, and
frequently objected to Lucy the fanaticism of some of her own
communion, while she intimated, rather than expressed, horror at the
latitudinarian principles which she had been taught to think connected
with the prelatical form of church government.

Thus, although their mutual affection seemed to increase rather than to
be diminished as their characters opened more fully on each other, the
feelings of each were mingled with some less agreeable ingredients. Lucy
felt a secret awe, amid all her affection for Ravenswood. His soul was
of an higher, prouder character than those with whom she had hitherto
mixed in intercourse; his ideas were more fierce and free; and he
contemned many of the opinions which had been inculcated upon her as
chiefly demanding her veneration. On the other hand, Ravenswood saw in
Lucy a soft and flexible character, which, in his eyes at least, seemed
too susceptible of being moulded to any form by those with whom
she lived. He felt that his own temper required a partner of a more
independent spirit, who could set sail with him on his course of life,
resolved as himself to dare indifferently the storm and the favouring
breeze. But Lucy was so beautiful, so devoutly attached to him, of a
temper so exquisitely soft and kind, that, while he could have wished
it were possible to inspire her with a greater degree of firmness and
resolution, and while he sometimes became impatient of the extreme fear
which she expressed of their attachment being prematurely discovered,
he felt that the softness of a mind, amounting almost to feebleness,
rendered her even dearer to him, as a being who had voluntarily clung
to him for protection, and made him the arbiter of her fate for weal or
woe. His feelings towards her at such moments were those which have been
since so beautifully expressed by our immortal Joanna Baillie:

     Thou sweetest thing,
     That e'er did fix its lightly-fibred sprays
     To the rude rock, ah! wouldst thou cling to me?
     Rough and storm-worn I am; yet love me as
     Thou truly dost, I will love thee again
     With true and honest heart, though all unmeet
     To be the mate of such sweet gentleness.

Thus the very points in which they differed seemed, in some measure, to
ensure the continuance of their mutual affection. If, indeed, they had
so fully appreciated each other's character before the burst of passion
in which they hastily pledged their faith to each other, Lucy might have
feared Ravenswood too much ever to have loved him, and he might have
construed her softness and docile temper as imbecility, rendering her
unworthy of his regard. But they stood pledged to each other; and Lucy
only feared that her lover's pride might one day teach him to regret
his attachment; Ravenswood, that a mind so ductile as Lucy's might, in
absence or difficulties, be induced, by the entreaties or influence of
those around her, to renounce the engagement she had formed.

"Do not fear it," said Lucy, when upon one occasion a hint of such
suspicion escaped her lover; "the mirrors which receive the reflection
of all successive objects are framed of hard materials like glass or
steel; the softer substances, when they receive an impression, retain it
undefaced."

"This is poetry, Lucy," said Ravenswood; "and in poetry there is always
fallacy, and sometimes fiction."

"Believe me, then, once more, in honest prose," said Lucy, "that, though
I will never wed man without the consent of my parents, yet neither
force nor persuasion shall dispose of my hand till you renounce the
right I have given you to it."

The lovers had ample time for such explanations. Henry was now more
seldom their companion, being either a most unwilling attendant upon the
lessons of his tutor, or a forward volunteer under the instructions of
the foresters or grooms. As for the Keeper, his mornings were spent in
his study, maintaining correspondences of all kinds, and balancing in
his anxious mind the various intelligence which he collected from every
quarter concerning the expected change of Scottish politics, and the
probable strength of the parties who were about to struggle for power.
At other times he busied himself about arranging, and countermanding, and
then again arranging, the preparations which he judged necessary for the
reception of the Marquis of A----, whose arrival had been twice delayed
by some necessary cause of detention.

In the midst of all these various avocations, political and domestic,
he seemed not to observe how much his daughter and his guest were thrown
into each other's society, and was censured by many of his neighbours,
according to the fashion of neighbours in all countries, for suffering
such an intimate connexion to take place betwixt two young persons.
The only natural explanation was, that he designed them for each other;
while, in truth, his only motive was to temporise and procrastinate
until he should discover the real extent of the interest which the
Marquis took in Ravenswood's affairs, and the power which he was likely
to possess of advancing them. Until these points should be made both
clear and manifest, the Lord Keeper resolved that he would do nothing
to commit himself, either in one shape or other; and, like many cunning
persons, he overreached himself deplorably.

Amongst those who had been disposed to censure, with the greatest
severity, the conduct of Sir William Ashton, in permitting the prolonged
residence of Ravenswood under his roof, and his constant attendance on
Miss Ashton, was the new Laird of Girnington, and his faithful squire
and bottleholder, personages formerly well known to us by the names of
Hayston and Bucklaw, and his companion Captain Craigengelt. The former
had at length succeeded to the extensive property of his long-lived
grand-aunt, and to considerable wealth besides, which he had employed
in redeeming his paternal acres (by the title appertaining to which he
still chose to be designated), notwithstanding Captain Craigengelt had
proposed to him a most advantageous mode of vesting the money in Law's
scheme, which was just then broached, and offered his services to travel
express to Paris for the purpose. But Bucklaw had so far derived wisdom
from adversity, that he would listen to no proposal which Craigengelt
could invent, which had the slightest tendency to risk his
newly-acquired independence. He that had once eat pease-bannocks, drank
sour wine, and slept in the secret chamber at Wolf's Crag, would, he
said, prize good cheer and a soft bed as long as he lived, and take
special care never to need such hospitality again.

Craigengelt, therefore, found himself disappointed in the first hopes
he had entertained of making a good hand of the Laird of Bucklaw. Still,
however, he reaped many advantages from his friend's good fortune.
Bucklaw, who had never been at all scrupulous in choosing his
companions, was accustomed to, and entertained by, a fellow whom he
could either laugh with or laugh at as he had a mind, who would take,
according to Scottish phrase, "the bit and the buffet," understood all
sports, whether within or without doors, and, when the laird had a mind
for a bottle of wine (no infrequent circumstance), was always ready to
save him from the scandal of getting drunk by himself. Upon these terms,
Craigengelt was the frequent, almost the constant, inmate of the house
of Girnington.

In no time, and under no possibility of circumstances, could good have
been derived from such an intimacy, however its bad consequences might
be qualified by the thorough knowledge which Bucklaw possessed of his
dependant's character, and the high contempt in which he held it. But,
as circumstances stood, this evil communication was particularly liable
to corrupt what good principles nature had implanted in the patron.

Craigengelt had never forgiven the scorn with which Ravenswood had torn
the mask of courage and honesty from his countenance; and to exasperate
Bucklaw's resentment against him was the safest mode of revenge which
occurred to his cowardly, yet cunning and malignant, disposition.

He brought up on all occasions the story of the challenge which
Ravenswood had declined to accept, and endeavoured, by every possible
insinuation, to make his patron believe that his honour was concerned
in bringing that matter to an issue by a present discussion with
Ravenswood. But respecting this subject Bucklaw imposed on him, at
length, a peremptory command of silence.

"I think," he said, "the Master has treated me unlike a gentleman, and
I see no right he had to send me back a cavalier answer when I demanded
the satisfaction of one. But he gave me my life once; and, in looking
the matter over at present, I put myself but on equal terms with him.
Should he cross me again, I shall consider the old accompt as balanced,
and his Mastership will do well to look to himself."

"That he should," re-echoed Craigengelt; "for when you are in practice,
Bucklaw, I would bet a magnum you are through him before the third
pass."

"Then you know nothing of the matter," said Bucklaw, "and you never saw
him fence."

"And I know nothing of the matter?" said the dependant--"a good jest, I
promise you! And though I never saw Ravenswood fence, have I not been at
Monsieur Sagoon's school, who was the first maitre d'armes at Paris;
and have I not been at Signor Poco's at Florence, and Meinheer
Durchstossen's at Vienna, and have I not seen all their play?"

"I don't know whether you have or not," said Bucklaw; "but what about
it, though you had?"

"Only that I will be d--d if ever I saw French, Italian, or
High-Dutchman ever make foot, hand, and eye keep time half so well as
you, Bucklaw."

"I believe you lie, Craigie," said Bucklaw; "however, I can hold my own,
both with single rapier, backsword, sword and dagger, broadsword, or
case of falchions--and that's as much as any gentleman need know of the
matter."

"And the doubt of what ninety-nine out of a hundred know," said
Craigengelt; "they learn to change a few thrusts with the small sword,
and then, forsooth, they understand the noble art of defence! Now, when
I was at Rouen in the year 1695, there was a Chevalier de Chapon and I
went to the opera, where we found three bits of English birkies----" "Is
it a long story you are going to tell?" said Bucklaw, interrupting him
without ceremony.

"Just as you like," answered the parasite, "for we made short work of
it."

"Then I like it short," said Bucklaw. "Is it serious or merry?"

"Devilish serious, I assure you, and so they found it; for the Chevalier
and I----"

"Then I don't like it at all," said Bucklaw; "so fill a brimmer of
my auld auntie's claret, rest her heart! And, as the Hielandman says,
Skioch doch na skiall."

"That was what tough old Sir Even Dhu used to say to me when I was out
with the metall'd lads in 1689. 'Craigengelt,' he used to say, 'you
are as pretty a fellow as ever held steel in his grip, but you have one
fault.'"

"If he had known you as long as I have don," said Bucklaw, "he would
have found out some twenty more; but hand long stories, give us your
toast, man."

Craigengelt rose, went a-tiptoe to the door, peeped out, shut it
carefully, came back again, clapped his tarnished gold-laced hat on one
side of his head, took his glass in one hand, and touching the hilt of
his hanger with the other, named, "The King over the water."

"I tell you what it is, Captain Craigengelt," said Bucklaw; "I shall
keep my mind to myself on thse subjects, having too much respect for the
memory of my venerable Aunt Girnington to put her lands and tenements
in the way of committing treason against established authority. Bring me
King James to Edinburgh, Captain, with thirty thousand men at his back,
and I'll tell you what I think about his title; but as for running my
neck into a noose, and my good broad lands into the statutory penalties,
'in that case made and provided,' rely upon it, you will find me no such
fool. So, when you mean to vapour with your hanger and your dram-cup
in support of treasonable toasts, you must find your liquor and company
elsewhere."

"Well, then," said Craigengelt, "name the toast yourself, and be it what
it like, I'll pledge you, were it a mile to the bottom."

"And I'll give you a toast that deserves it, my boy," said Bucklaw;
"what say you to Miss Lucy Ashton?"

"Up with it," said the Captain, as he tossed off his brimmer, "the
bonniest lass in Lothian! What a pity the old sneckdrawing Whigamore,
her father, is about to throw her away upon that rag of pride and
beggary, the Master of Ravenswood!"

"That's not quite so clear," said Bucklaw, in a tone which, though it
seemed indifferent, excited his companion's eager curiosity; and not
that only, but also his hope of working himself into some sort of
confidence, which might make him necessary to his patron, being by no
means satisfied to rest on mere sufferance, if he could form by art or
industry a more permanent title to his favour.

"I thought," said he, after a moment's pause, "that was a settled
matter; they are continually together, and nothing else is spoken of
betwixt Lammer Law and Traprain."

"They may say what they please," replied his patron, "but I know better;
and I'll give you Miss Lucy Ashton's health again, my boy."

"And I woul drink it on my knee," said Craigengelt, "if I thought the
girl had the spirit to jilt that d--d son of a Spaniard."

"I am to request you will not use the word 'jilt' and Miss Ashton's name
together," said Bucklaw, gravely.

"Jilt, did I say? Discard, my lad of acres--by Jove, I meant to
discard," replied Craigengelt; "and I hope she'll discard him like
a small card at piquet, and take in the king of hearts, my boy! But
yet----"

"But what?" said his patron.

"But yet I know for certain they are hours together alone, and in the
woods and the fields."

"That's her foolish father's dotage; that will be soon put out of the
lass's head, if it ever gets into it," answered Bucklaw. "And now fill
your glass again, Captain; I am going to make you happy; I am going to
let you into a secret--a plot--a noosing plot--only the noose is but
typical."

"A marrying matter?" said Craigengelt, and his jaw fell as he asked the
question, for he suspected that matrimony would render his situation
at Girnington much more precarious than during the jolly days of his
patron's bachelorhood.

"Ay, a marriage, man," said Bucklaw; "but wherefore droops thy mighty
spirit, and why grow the rubies on they cheek so pale? The board will
have a corner, and the corner will have a trencher, and the trencher
will have a glass beside it; and the board-end shall be filled, and
the trencher and the glass shall be replenished for thee, if all the
petticoats in Lothian had sworn the contrary. What, man! I am not the
boy to put myself into leading-strings."

"So says many an honest fellow," said Craigengelt, "and some of my
special friends; but, curse me if I know the reason, the women could
never bear me, and always contrived to trundle me out of favour before
the honeymoon was over."

"If you could have kept your ground till that was over, you might have
made a good year's pension," said Bucklaw.

"But I never could," answered the dejected parasite. "There was my Lord
Castle-Cuddy--we were hand and glove: I rode his horses, borrowed money
both for him and from him, trained his hawks, and taught him how to lay
his bets; and when he took a fancy of marrying, I married him to Katie
Glegg, whom I thought myself as sure of as man could be of woman. Egad,
she had me out of the house, as if I had run on wheels, within the first
fortnight!"

"Well!" replied Bucklaw, "I think I have nothing of Castle-Cuddy about
me, or Lucy of Katie Glegg. But you see the thing will go on whether you
like it or no; the only question is, will you be useful?"

"Useful!" exclaimed the Captain, "and to thee, my lad of lands, my
darling boy, whom I would tramp barefooted through the world for! Name
time, place, mode, and circumstances, and see if I will not be useful in
all uses that can be devised."

"Why, then, you must ride two hundred miles for me," said the patron.

"A thousand, and call them a flea's leap," answered the dependant; "I'll
cause saddle my horse directly."

"Better stay till you know where you are to go, and what you are to
do," quoth Bucklaw. "You know I have a kinswoman in Northumberland, Lady
Blenkensop by name, whose old acquaintance I had the misfortune to lose
in the period of my poverty, but the light of whose countenance shone
forth upon me when the sun of my prosperity began to arise."

"D--n all such double-faced jades!" exclaimed Craigengelt, heroically;
"this I will say for John Craigengelt, that he is his friend's friend
through good report and bad report, poverty and riches; and you know
something of that yourself, Bucklaw."

"I have not forgot your merits," said his patron; "I do remember that,
in my extremities, you had a mind to CRIMP me for the service of the
French king, or of the Pretender; and, moreover, that you afterwards
lent me a score of pieces, when, as I firmly believe, you had heard the
news that old Lady Girnington had a touch of the dead palsy. But don't
be downcast, John; I believe, after all, you like me very well in your
way, and it is my misfortune to have no better counsellor at present.
To return to this Lady Blenkensop, you must know, she is a close
confederate of Duchess Sarah."

"What! of Sall Jennings?" exclaimed Craigengelt; "then she must be a
good one."

"Hold your tongue, and keep your Tory rants to yourself, if it be
possible," said Bucklaw. "I tell you, that through the Duchess of
Marlborough has this Northumbrian cousin of mine become a crony of Lady
Ashton, the Keeper's wife, or, I may say, the Lord Keeper's Lady Keeper,
and she has favoured Lady Blenkensop with a visit on her return from
London, and is just now at her old mansion-house on the banks of the
Wansbeck. Now, sir, as it has been the use and wont of these ladies to
consider their husbands as of no importance in the management of their
own families, it has been their present pleasure, without consulting
Sir William Ashton, to put on the tapis a matrimonial alliance, to be
concluded between Lucy Ashton and my own right honourable self, Lady
Ashton acting as self-constituted plenipotentiary on the part of her
daughter and husband, and Mother Blenkensop, equally unaccredited, doing
me the honour to be my representative. You may suppose I was a little
astonished when I found that a treaty, in which I was so considerably
interested, had advanced a good way before I was even consulted."

"Capot me! if I think that was according to the rules of the game," said
his confidant; "and pray, what answer did you return?"

"Why, my first thought was to send the treaty to the devil, and the
negotiators along with it, for a couple of meddling old women; my next
was to laugh very hearily; and my third and last was a settled opinion
that the thing was reasonable, and would suit me well enough."

"Why, I thought you had never seen the wench but once, and then she had
her riding-mask on; I am sure you told me so."

"Ay, but I liked her very well then. And Ravenswood's dirty usage of
me--shutting me out of doors to dine with the lackeys, because he
had the Lord Keeper, forsooth, and his daughter, to be guests in his
beggarly castle of starvation,--d--n me, Craigengelt, if I ever forgive
him till I play him as good a trick!"

"No more you should, if you are a lad of mettle," said Craigengelt, the
matter now taking a turn in which he could sympathise; "and if you carry
this wench from him, it will break his heart."

"That it will not," said Bucklaw; "his heart is all steeled over with
reason and philosophy, things that you, Craigie, know nothing about
more than myself, God help me. But it will break his pride, though, and
that's what I'm driving at."

"Distance me!" said Craigengelt, "but I know the reason now of his
unmannerly behaviour at his old tumble-down tower yonder. Ashamed of
your company?--no, no! Gad, he was afraid you would cut in and carry off
the girl."

"Eh! Craigengelt?" said Bucklaw, "do you really think so? but no, no!
he is a devilish deal prettier man than I am." "Who--he?" exclaimed the
parasite. "He's as black as the crook; and for his size--he's a tall
fellow, to be sure, but give me a light, stout, middle-sized----"

"Plague on thee!" said Bucklaw, interrupting him, "and on me for
listening to you! You would say as much if I were hunch-backed. But as
to Ravenswood--he has kept no terms with me, I'll keep none with him; if
I CAN win this girl from him, I WILL win her."

"Win her! 'sblood, you SHALL win her, point, quint, and quatorze, my
king of trumps; you shall pique, repique, and capot him."

"Prithee, stop thy gambling cant for one instant," said Bucklaw.
"Things have come thus far, that I have entertained the proposal of my
kinswoman, agreed to the terms of jointure, amount of fortune, and so
forth, and that the affair is to go forward when Lady Ashton comes down,
for she takes her daughter and her son in her own hand. Now they want me
to send up a confidential person with some writings."

"By this good win, I'll ride to the end of the world--the very gates of
Jericho, and the judgment-seat of Prester John, for thee!" ejaculated
the Captain.

"Why, I believe you would do something for me, and a great deal for
yourself. Now, any one could carry the writings; but you will have a
little more to do. You must contrive to drop out before my Lady Ashton,
just as if it were a matter of little consequence, the residence of
Ravenswood at her husband's house, and his close intercourse with Miss
Ashton; and you may tell her that all the country talks of a visit from
the Marquis of A----, as it is supposed, to make up the match betwixt
Ravenswood and her daughter. I should like to hear what she says to all
this; for, rat me! if I have any idea of starting for the plate at all
if Ravenswood is to win the race, and he has odds against me already."

"Never a bit; the wench has too much sense, and in that belief I drink
her health a third time; and, were time and place fitting, I would drink
it on bended knees, and he that would not pledge me, I would make his
guts garter his stockings."

"Hark ye, Craigengelt; as you are going into the society of women of
rank," said Bucklaw, "I'll thank you to forget your strange blackguard
oaths and 'damme's.' I'll write to them, though, that you are a blunt,
untaught fellow."

"Ay, ay," replied Craigengelt--"a plain, blunt, honest, downright
soldier."

"Not too honest, not too much of the soldier neither; but such as thou
art, it is my luck to need thee, for I must have spurs put to Lady
Ashton's motions." "I'll dash them up to the rowel-heads," said
Craigengelt; "she shall come here at the gallop, like a cow chased by a
whole nest of hornets, and her tail over her rump like a corkscrew."

"And hear ye, Craigie," said Bucklaw; "your boots and doublet are good
enough to drink in, as the man says in the play, but they are somewhat
too greasy for tea-table service; prithee, get thyself a little better
rigged out, and here is to pay all charges."

"Nay, Bucklaw; on my soul, man, you use me ill. However," added
Craigengelt, pocketing the money, "if you will have me so far indebted
to you, I must be conforming."

"Well, horse and away!" said the patron, "so soon as you have got your
riding livery in trim. You may ride the black crop-ear; and, hark ye,
I'll make you a present of him to boot."

"I drink to the good luck of my mission," answered the ambassador, "in a
half-pint bumper."

"I thank ye, Craigie, and pledge you; I see nothing against it but the
father or the girl taking a tantrum, and I am told the mother can wind
them both round her little finger. Take care not to affront her with any
of your Jacobite jargon."

"Oh, ay, true--she is a Whig, and a friend of old Sall of Marlborough;
thank my stars, I can hoist any colours at a pinch! I have fought as
hard under John Churchill as ever I did under Dundee or the Duke of
Berwick."

"I verily believe you, Craigie," said the lord of the mansion; "but,
Craigie, do you, pray, step down to the cellar, and fetch us up a bottle
of the Burgundy, 1678; it is in the fourth bin from the right-hand turn.
And I say, Craigie, you may fetch up half a dozen whilst you are about
it. Egad, we'll make a night on't!"




CHAPTER XXII.

     And soon they spied the merry-men green,
     And eke the coach and four.

     Duke upon Duke.

CRAIGENGELT set forth on his mission so soon as his equipage was
complete, prosecuted his journey with all diligence, and accomplished
his commission with all the dexterity for which bucklaw had given him
credit. As he arrived with credentials from Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw, he
was extremely welcome to both ladies; and those who are prejudiced
in favour of a new acquaintance can, for a time at least, discover
excellencies in his very faults and perfections in his deficiencies.
Although both ladies were accustomed to good society, yet, being
pre-determined to find out an agreeable and well-behaved gentleman
in Mr. Hayston's friend, they succeeded wonderfully in imposing on
themselves. It is true that Craigengelt was now handsomely dressed, and
that was a point of no small consequence. But, independent of outward
show, his blackguard impudence of address was construed into honourable
bluntness becoming his supposed military profession; his hectoring
passed for courage, and his sauciness for wit. Lest, however, any one
should think this a violation of probability, we must add, in fairness
to the two ladies, that their discernment was greatly blinded, and their
favour propitiated, by the opportune arrival of Captain Craigengelt in
the moment when they were longing for a third hand to make a party at
tredrille, in which, as in all games, whether of chance or skill, that
worthy person was a great proficient.

When he found himself established in favour, his next point was how
best to use it for the furtherance of his patron's views. He found
Lady Ashton prepossessed strongly in favour of the motion which Lady
Blenkensop, partly from regard to her kinswoman, partly from the spirit
of match-making, had not hesitated to propose to her; so that his task
was an easy one. Bucklaw, reformed from his prodigality, was just
the sort of husband which she desired to have for her Shepherdess of
Lammermoor; and while the marriage gave her an easy fortune, and a
respectable country gentleman for her husband, Lady Ashton was
of opinion that her destinies would be fully and most favourably
accomplished. It so chanced, also, that Bucklaw, among his new
acquisitions, had gained the management of a little political interest
in a neighbouring county where the Douglas family originally held large
possessions. It was one of the bosom-hopes of Lady Ashton that her
eldest son, Sholto, should represent this county in the British
Parliament, and she saw this alliance with Bucklaw as a circumstance
which might be highly favourable to her wishes.

Craigengelt, who, in his way, by no means wanted sagacity, no sooner
discovered in what quarter the wind of Lady Ashton's wishes sate, than
he trimmed his course accordingly. "There was little to prevent Bucklaw
himself from sitting for the county; he must carry the heat--must walk
the course. Two cousins-german, six more distant kinsmen, his factor and
his chamberlain, were all hollow votes; and the Girnington interest had
always carried, betwixt love and fear, about as many more. But Bucklaw
cared no more about riding the first horse, and that sort of thing, than
he, Craigengelt, did about a game at birkie: it was a pity his interest
was not in good guidance."

All this Lady Ashton drank in with willing and attentive ears, resolving
internally to be herself the person who should take the management of
the political influence of her destined son-in-law, for the benefit of
her eldest-born, Sholto, and all other parties concerned.

When he found her ladyship thus favourably disposed, the Captain
proceeded, to use his employer's phrase, to set spurs to her resolution,
by hinting at the situation of matters at Ravenswood Castle, the long
residence which the heir of that family had made with the Lord Keeper,
and the reports which--though he would be d--d ere he gave credit to any
of them--had been idly circulated in the neighbourhood. It was not the
Captain's cue to appear himself to be uneasy on the subject of these
rumours; but he easily saw from Lady Ashton's flushed cheek, hesitating
voice, and flashing eye, that she had caught the alarm which he intended
to communicate. She had not heard from her husband so often or so
regularly as she though him bound in duty to have written, and of this
very interesting intelligence concerning his visit to the Tower of
Wolf's Crag, and the guest whom, with such cordiality, he had received
at Ravenswood Castle, he had suffered his lady to remain altogether
ignorant, until she now learned it by the chance information of a
stranger. Such concealment approached, in her apprehension, to a
misprision, at last, of treason, if not to actual rebellion against
her matrimonial authority; and in her inward soul she did vow to take
vengeance on the Lord Keeper, as on a subject detected in meditating
revolt. Her indignation burned the more fiercely as she found herself
obliged to suppress it in presence of Lady Blenkensop, the kinswoman,
and of Craigengelt, the confidential friend, of Bucklaw, of whose
alliance she now became trebly desirous, since it occurred to her
alarmed imagination that her husband might, in his policy or timidity,
prefer that of Ravenswood.

The Captain was engineer enough to discover that the train was fired;
and therefore heard, in the course of the same day, without the least
surprise, that Lady Ashton had resolved to abridge her visit to Lady
Blenkensop, and set forth with the peep of morning on her return to
Scotland, using all the despatch which the state of the roads and the
mode of travelling would possibly permit.

Unhappy Lord Keeper! little was he aware what a storm was travelling
towards him in all the speed with which an old-fashioned coach and six
could possibly achieve its journey. He, like Don Gayferos, "forgot his
lady fair and true," and was only anxious about the expected visit
of the Marquis of A----. Soothfast tidings had assured him that this
nobleman was at length, and without fail, to honour his castle at one
in the afternoon, being a late dinner-hour; and much was the bustle in
consequence of the annunciation. The Lord Keeper traversed the chambers,
held consultation with the butler in the cellars, and even ventured, at
the risk of a demele with a cook of a spirit lofty enough to scorn the
admonitions of Lady Ashton herself, to peep into the kitchen. Satisfied,
at length, that everything was in as active a train of preparation as
was possible, he summoned Ravenswood and his daughter to walk upon the
terrace, for the purpose of watching, from that commanding position,
the earliest symptoms of his lordship's approach. For this purpose, with
slow and idle step, he paraded the terrace, which, flanked with a heavy
stone battlement, stretched in front of the castle upon a level with the
first story; while visitors found access to the court by a projecting
gateway, the bartizan or flat-leaded roof of which was accessible from
the terrace by an easy flight of low and broad steps. The whole bore a
resemblance partly to a castle, partly to a nobleman's seat; and though
calculated, in some respects, for defence, evinced that it had been
constructed under a sense of the power and security of the ancient Lords
of Ravenswood.

This pleasant walk commanded a beautiful and extensive view. But what
was most to our present purpose, there were seen from the terrace two
roads, one leading from the east, and one from the westward, which,
crossing a ridge opposed to the eminence on which the castle stood, at
different angles, gradually approached each other, until they joined not
far from the gate of the avenue. It was to the westward approach that
the Lord Keeper, from a sort of fidgeting anxiety, his daughter, from
complaisance to him, and Ravenswood, though feeling some symptoms of
internal impatience, out of complaisance to his daughter, directed their
eyes to see the precursors of the Marquis's approach.

These were not long of presenting themselves. Two running footmen,
dressed in white, with black jockey-caps, and long staffs in their
hands, headed the train; and such was their agility, that they found
no difficulty in keeping the necessary advance, which the etiquette of
their station required, before the carriage and horsemen. Onward
they came at a long swinging trot, arguing unwearied speed in their
long-breathed calling. Such running footmen are often alluded to in old
plays (I would particularly instance Middleton's Mad World, my Masters),
and perhaps may be still remembered by some old persons in Scotland,
as part of the retinue of the ancient nobility when travelling in full
ceremony. Behind these glancing meteors, who footed it as if the Avenger
of Blood had been behind them, came a cloud of dust, raised by riders
who preceded, attended, or followed the state-carriage of the Marquis.

The privilege of nobility, in those days, had something in it impressive
on the imagination. The dresses and liveries and number of their
attendants, their style of travelling, the imposing, and almost warlike,
air of the armed men who surrounded them, place them far above the
laird, who travelled with his brace of footmen; and as to rivalry from
the mercantile part of the community, these would as soon have thought
of imitating the state equipage of the Sovereign. At present it
is different; and I myself, Peter Pattieson, in a late journey to
Edinburgh, had the honour, in the mail-coach phrase to "change a leg"
with a peer of the realm. It was not so in the days of which I write;
and the Marquis's approach, so long expected in vain, now took place
in the full pomp of ancient aristocracy. Sir William Ashton was so
much interested in what he beheld, and in considering the ceremonial
of reception, in case any circumstance had been omitted, that he scarce
heard his son Henry exclaim: "There is another coach and six coming down
the east road, papa; can they both belong to the Marquis of A----?"

At length, when the youngster had fairly compelled his attention by
pulling his sleeve,

     He turned his eyes, and, as he turned, survey'd
     An awful vision.

Sure enough, another coach and six, with four servants or outriders in
attendance, was descending the hill from the eastward, at such a pace as
made it doubtful which of the carriages thus approaching from different
quarters would first reach the gate at the extremity of the avenue. The
one coach was green, the other blue; and not the green and blue chariots
in the circus of Rome or Constantinople excited more turmoil among the
citizens than the double apparition occasioned in the mind of the Lord
Keeper.

We all remember the terrible exclamation of the dying profligate, when a
friend, to destroy what he supposed the hypochondriac idea of a spectre
appearing in a certain shape at a given hour, placed before him a person
dressed up in the manner he described. "Mon Dieu!" said the expiring
sinner, who, it seems, saw both the real and polygraphic apparition,
"il y en a deux!" The surprise of the Lord Keeper was scarcely less
unpleasing at the duplication of the expected arrival; his mind misgave
him strangely. There was no neighbour who would have approached so
unceremoniously, at a time when ceremony was held in such respect. It
must be Lady Ashton, said his conscience, and followed up the hint with
an anxious anticipation of the purpose of her sudden and unannounced
return. He felt that he was caught "in the manner." That the company
in which she had so unluckily surprised him was likely to be highly
distasteful to her, there was no question; and the only hope which
remained for him was her high sense of dignified propriety, which, he
trusted, might prevent a public explosion. But so active were his doubts
and fears as altogether to derange his purposed ceremonial for the
reception of the Marquis.

These feelings of apprehension were not confined to Sir William Ashton.
"It is my mother--it is my mother!" said Lucy, turning as pale as ashes,
and clasping her hands together as she looked at Ravenswood.

"And if it be Lady Ashton," said her lover to her in a low tone, "what
can be the occasion of such alarm? Surely the return of a lady to
the family from which she has been so long absent should excite other
sensations than those of fear and dismay."

"You do not know my mother," said Miss Ashton, in a tone almost
breathless with terror; "what will she say when she sees you in this
place!"

"My stay has been too long," said Ravenswood, somewhat haughtily, "if
her displeasure at my presence is likely to be so formidable. My dear
Lucy," he resumed, in a tone of soothing encouragement, "you are too
childishly afraid of Lady Ashton; she is a woman of family--a lady
of fashion--a person who must know the world, and what is due to her
husband and her husband's guests." Lucy shook her head; and, as if
her mother, still at the distance of half a mile, could have seen and
scrutinised her deportment, she withdrew herself from beside Ravenswood,
and, taking her brother Henry's arm, led him to a different part of the
terrace. The Keeper also shuffled down towards the portal of the great
gate, without inviting Ravenswood to accompany him; and thus he remained
standing alone on the terrace, deserted and shunned, as it were, by
the inhabitants of the mansion. This suited not the mood of one who was
proud in proportion to his poverty, and who thought that, in sacrificing
his deep-rooted resentments so far as to become Sir William Ashton's
guest, he conferred a favour, and received none. "I can forgive Lucy,"
he said to himself; "she is young, timid, and conscious of an important
engagement assumed without her mother's sanction; yet she should
remember with whom it has been assumed, and leave me no reason to
suspect that she is ashamed of her choice. For the Keeper, sense,
spirit, and expression seem to have left his face and manner since he
had the first glimpse of Lady Ashton's carriage. I must watch how this
is to end; and, if they give me reason to think myself an unwelcome
guest, my visit is soon abridged."

With these suspicions floating on his mind, he left the terrace, and
walking towards the stables of the castle, gave directions that his
horse should be kept in readiness, in case he should have occasion to
ride abroad.

In the mean while, the drivers of the two carriages, the approach of
which had occasioned so much dismay at the castle, had become aware of
each other's presence, as they approached upon different lines to
the head of the avenue, as a common centre. Lady Ashton's driver and
postilions instantly received orders to get foremost, if possible, her
ladyship being desirous of despatching her first interview with her
husband before the arrival of these guests, whoever they might happen to
be. On the other hand, the coachman of the Marquis, conscious of his own
dignity and that of his master, and observing the rival charioteer was
mending his pace, resolved, like a true brother of the whip, whether
ancient or modern, to vindicate his right of precedence. So that, to
increase the confusion of the Lord Keeper's understanding, he saw the
short time which remained for consideration abridged by the haste of the
contending coachmen, who, fixing their eyes sternly on each other, and
applying the lash smartly to their horses, began to thunder down the
descent with emulous rapidity, while the horsemen who attended them were
forced to put on to a hand-gallop.

Sir William's only chance now remaining was the possibility of an
overturn, and that his lady or visitor might break their necks. I am
not aware that he formed any distinct wish on the subject, but I have no
reason to think that his grief in either case would have been altogether
inconsolable. This chance, however, also disappeared; for Lady Ashton,
though insensible to fear, began to see the ridicule of running a race
with a visitor of distinction, the goal being the portal of her own
castle, and commanded her coachman, as they approached the avenue, to
slacken his pace, and allow precedence to the stranger's equipage; a
command which he gladly obeyed, as coming in time to save his honour,
the horses of the Marquis's carriage being better, or, at least, fresher
than his own. He restrained his pace, therefore, and suffered the green
coach to enter the avenue, with all its retinue, which pass it occupied
with the speed of a whirlwind. The Marquis's laced charioteer no
sooner found the pas d'avance was granted to him than he resumed a more
deliberate pace, at which he advanced under the embowering shade of the
lofty elms, surrounded by all the attendants; while the carriage of Lady
Ashton followed, still more slowly, at some distance.

In the front of the castle, and beneath the portal which admitted guests
into the inner court, stood Sir William Ashton, much perplexed in mind,
his younger son and daughter beside him, and in their rear a train of
attendants of various ranks, in and out of livery. The nobility and
gentry of Scotland, at this period, were remarkable even to extravagance
for the number of their servants, whose services were easily purchased
in a country where men were numerous beyond proportion to the means of
employing them.

The manners of a man trained like Sir William Ashton are too much at his
command to remain long disconcerted with the most adverse concurrence
of circumstances. He received the Marquis, as he alighted from his
equipage, with the usual compliments of welcome; and, as he ushered
him into the great hall, expressed his hope that his journey had been
pleasant. The Marquis was a tall, well-made man, with a thoughtful and
intelligent countenance, and an eye in which the fire of ambition had
for some years replaced the vivacity of youth; a bold, proud expression
of countenance, yet chastened by habitual caution, and the desire
which, as the head of a party, he necessarily entertained of acquiring
popularity. He answered with courtesy the courteous inquiries of the
Lord Keeper, and was formally presented to Miss Ashton, in the course
of which ceremony the Lord Keeper gave the first symptom of what was
chiefly occupying his mind, by introducing his daughter as "his wife,
Lady Ashton."

Lucy blushed; the Marquis looked surprised at the extremely juvenile
appearance of his hostess, and the Lord Keeper with difficulty rallied
himself so far as to explain. "I should have said my daughter, my lord;
but the truth is, that I saw Lady Ashton's carriage enter the avenue
shortly after your lordship's, and----"

"Make no apology, my lord," replied his noble guest; "let me entreat
you will wait on your lady, and leave me to cultivate Miss Ashton's
acquaintance. I am shocked my people should have taken precedence of our
hostess at her own gate; but your lordship is aware that I supposed
Lady Ashton was still in the south. Permit me to beseech you will waive
ceremony, and hasten to welcome her."

This was precisely what the Lord Keeper longed to do; and he instantly
profited by his lordship's obliging permission. To see Lady Ashton, and
encounter the first burst of her displeasure in private, might prepare
her, in some degree, to receive her unwelcome guests with due decorum.
As her carriage, therefore, stopped, the arm of the attentive husband
was ready to assist Lady Ashton in dismounting. Looking as if she
saw him not, she put his arm aside, and requested that of Captain
Craigengelt, who stood by the coach with his laced hat under his arm,
having acted as cavaliere servente, or squire in attendance, during the
journey. Taking hold of this respectable person's arm as if to support
her, Lady Ashton traversed the court, uttering a word or two by way
of direction to the servants, but not one to Sir William, who in
vain endeavoured to attract her attention, as he rather followed than
accompanied her into the hall, in which they found the Marquis in close
conversation with the Master of Ravenswood. Lucy had taken the first
opportunity of escaping. There was embarrassment on every countenance
except that of the Marquis of A----; for even Craigengelt's impudence
was hardly able to veil his fear of Ravenswood, an the rest felt the
awkwardness of the position in which they were thus unexpectedly placed.

After waiting a moment to be presented by Sir William Ashton, the
Marquis resolved to introduce himself. "The Lord Keeper," he said,
bowing to Lady Ashton, "has just introduced to me his daughter as his
wife; he might very easily present Lady Ashton as his daughter, so
little does she differ from what I remember her some years since. Will
she permit an old acquaintance the privilege of a guest?"

He saluted the lady with too good a grace to apprehend a repulse,
and then proceeded: "This, Lady Ashton, is a peacemaking visit,
and therefore I presume to introduce my cousin, the young Master of
Ravenswood, to your favourable notice."

Lady Ashton could not choose but courtesy; but there was in her
obeisance an air of haughtiness approaching to contemptuous repulse.
Ravenswood could not choose but bow; but his manner returned the scorn
with which he had been greeted.

"Allow me," she said, "to present to your lordship MY friend."
Craigengelt, with the forward impudence which men of his cast mistake
for ease, made a sliding bow to the Marquis, which he graced by a
flourish of his gold-laced hat. The lady turned to her husband. "You
and I, Sir William," she said, and these were the first words she had
addressed to him, "have acquired new acquaintances since we parted; let
me introduce the acquisition I have made to mine--Captain Craigengelt."

Another bow, and another flourish of the gold-laced hat, which was
returned by the Lord Keeper without intimation of former recognition,
and with that sort of anxious readiness which intimated his wish that
peace and amnesty should take place betwixt the contending parties,
including the auxiliaries on both sides. "Let me introduce you to the
Master of Ravenswood," said he to Captain Craigengelt, following up the
same amicable system.

But the Master drew up his tall form to the full extent of his height,
and without so much as looking towards the person thus introduced to
him, he said, in a marked tone: "Captain Craigengelt and I are already
perfectly well acquainted with each other."

"Perfectly--perfectly," replied the Captain, in a mumbling tone, like
that of a double echo, and with a flourish of his hat, the circumference
of which was greatly abridged, compared with those which had so
cordially graced his introduction to the Marquis and the Lord Keeper.

Lockhard, followed by three menials, now entered with wine and
refreshments, which it was the fashion to offer as a whet before dinner;
and when they were placed before the guests, Lady Ashton made an apology
for withdrawing her husband from them for some minutes upon business of
special import. The Marquis, of course, requested her ladyship would lay
herself under no restraint; and Craigengelt, bolting with speed a second
glass of racy canary, hastened to leave the room, feeling no great
pleasure in the prospect of being left alone with the Marquis of A----
and the Master of Ravenswood; the presence of the former holding him in
awe, and that of the latter in bodily terror.

Some arrangements about his horse and baggage formed the pretext for
his sudden retreat, in which he persevered, although Lady Ashton gave
Lockhard orders to be careful most particularly to accommodate Captain
Craigengelt with all the attendance which he could possibly require. The
Marquis and the Master of Ravenswood were thus left to communicate to
each other their remarks upon the reception which they had met with,
while Lady Ashton led the way, and her lord followed somewhat like a
condemned criminal, to her ladyship's dressing-room.

So soon as the spouses had both entered, her ladyship gave way to that
fierce audacity of temper which she had with difficulty suppressed, out
of respect to appearances. She shut the door behind the alarmed Lord
Keeper, took the key out of the spring-lock, and with a countenance
which years had not bereft of its haughty charms, and eyes which spoke
at once resolution and resentment, she addressed her astounded husband
in these words: "My lord, I am not greatly surprised at the connexions
you have been pleased to form during my absence, they are entirely in
conformity with your birth and breeding; and if I did expect anything
else, I heartily own my error, and that I merit, by having done so, the
disappointment you had prepared for me."

"My dear Lady Ashton--my dear Eleanor [Margaret]," said the Lord Keeper,
"listen to reason for a moment, and I will convince you I have acted
with all the regard due to the dignity, as well as the interest, of my
family."

"To the interest of YOUR family I conceive you perfectly capable of
attending," returned the indignant lady, "and even to the dignity of
your own family also, as far as it requires any looking after. But as
mine happens to be inextricably involved with it, you will excuse me if
I choose to give my own attention so far as that is concerned."

"What would you have, Lady Ashton?" said the husband. "What is it that
displeases you? Why is it that, on your return after so long an absence,
I am arraigned in this manner?" "Ask your own conscience, Sir William,
what has prompted you to become a renegade to your political party and
opinions, and led you, for what I know, to be on the point of marrying
your only daughter to a beggarly Jacobite bankrupt, the inveterate enemy
of your family to the boot."

"Why, what, in the name of common sense and common civility, would you
have me do, madam?" answered her husband. "Is it possible for me, with
ordinary decency, to turn a young gentleman out of my house, who saved
my daughter's life and my own, but the other morning, as it were?"

"Saved your life! I have heard of that story," said the lady. "The Lord
Keeper was scared by a dun cow, and he takes the young fellow who killed
her for Guy of Warwick: any butcher from Haddington may soon have an
equal claim on your hospitality."

"Lady Ashton," stammered the Keeper, "this is intolerable; and when I am
desirous, too, to make you easy by any sacrifice, if you would but tell
me what you would be at."

"Go down to your guests," said the imperious dame, "and make your
apology to Ravenswood, that the arrival of Captain Craigengelt and some
other friends renders it impossible for you to offer him lodgings at the
castle. I expect young Mr. Hayston of Bucklaw."

"Good heavens, madam!" ejaculated her husband. "Ravenswood to give place
to Craigengelt, a common gambler and an informer! It was all I could do
to forbear desiring the fellow to get out of my house, and I was much
surprised to see him in your ladyship's train."

"Since you saw him there, you might be well assured," answered this meek
helpmate, "that he was proper society. As to this Ravenswood, he only
meets with the treatment which, to my certain knowledge, he gave to a
much-valued friend of mine, who had the misfortune to be his guest some
time since. But take your resolution; for, if Ravenswood does not quit
the house, I will."

Sir William Ashton paced up and down the apartment in the most
distressing agitation; fear, and shame, and anger contending against the
habitual deference he was in the use of rendering to his lady. At length
it ended, as is usual with timid minds placed in such circumstances, in
his adopting a mezzo termine--a middle measure.

"I tell you frankly, madam, I neither can nor will be guilty of the
incivility you propose to the Master of Ravenswood; he has not deserved
it at my hand. If you will be so unreasonable as to insult a man of
quality under your own roof, I cannot prevent you; but I will not at
least be the agent in such a preposterous proceeding."

"You will not?" asked the lady.

"No, by heavens, madam!" her husband replied; "ask me anything congruent
with common decency, as to drop his acquaintance by degrees, or the
like; but to bid him leave my house is what I will nto and cannot
consent to."

"Then the task of supporting the honour of the family will fall on me,
as it has often done before," said the lady.

She sat down, and hastily wrote a few lines. The Lord Keeper made
another effort to prevent her taking a step so decisive, just as she
opened the door to call her female attendant from the ante-room. "Think
what you are doing, Lady Ashton: you are making a mortal enemy of a
young man who is like to have the means of harming us----"

"Did you ever know a Douglas who feared an enemy?" answered the lady,
contemptuously.

"Ay, but he is as proud and vindictive as an hundred Douglasses, and an
hundred devils to boot. Think of it for a night only."

"Not for another moment," answered the lady. "Here, Mrs. Patullo, give
this billet to young Ravenswood."

"To the Master, madam!" said Mrs. Patullo.

"Ay, to the Master, if you call him so."

"I wash my hands of it entirely," said the Keeper; "and I shall go down
into the garden, and see that Jardine gathers the winter fruit for the
dessert."

"Do so," said the lady, looking after him with glances of infinite
contempt; "and thank God that you leave one behind you as fit to protect
the honour of the family as you are to look after pippins and pears."

The Lord Keeper remained long enough in the garden to give her
ladyship's mind time to explode, and to let, as he thought, at least the
first violence of Ravenswood's displeasure blow over. When he entered
the hall, he found the Marquis of A---- giving orders to some of his
attendants. He seemed in high displeasure, and interrupted an apology
which Sir William had commenced for having left his lordship alone.

"I presume, Sir William, you are no stranger to this singular billet
with which MY kinsman of Ravenswood (an emphasis on the word 'my') has
been favoured by your lady; and, of course, that you are prepared
to receive my adieus. My kinsman is already gone, having thought it
unnecessary to offer any on his part, since all former civilities had
been cancelled by this singular insult."

"I protest, my lord," said Sir William, holding the billet in his hand,
"I am not privy to the contents of this letter. I know Lady Ashton is
a warm-tempered and prejudiced woman, and I am sincerely sorry for any
offence that has been given or taken; but I hope your lordship will
consider that a lady----"

"Should bear herself towards persons of a certain rank with the breeding
of one," said the Marquis, completing the half-uttered sentence.

"True, my lord," said the unfortunate Keeper; "but Lady Ashton is still
a woman----"

"And, as such, methinks," said the Marquis, again interrupting him,
"should be taught the duties which correspond to her station. But
here she comes, and I will learn from her own mouth the reason of this
extraordinary and unexpected affront offered to my near relation, while
both he and I were her ladyship's guests."

Lady Ashton accordingly entered the apartment at this moment. Her
dispute with Sir William, and a subsequent interview with her daughter,
had not prevented her from attending to the duties of her toilette. She
appeared in full dress; and, from the character of her countenance and
manner, well became the splendour with which ladies of quality then
appeared on such occasions.

The Marquis of A---- bowed haughtily, and she returned the salute with
equal pride and distance of demeanour. He then took from the passive
hand of Sir William Ashton the billet he had given him the moment before
he approached the lady, and was about to speak, when she interrupted
him. "I perceive, my lord, you are about to enter upon an unpleasant
subject. I am sorry any such should have occurred at this time, to
interrupt in the slightest degree the respectful reception due to your
lordship; but so it is. Mr. Edgar Ravenswood, for whom I have addressed
the billet in your lordship's hand, has abused the hospitality of this
family, and Sir William Ashton's softness of temper, in order to seduce
a young person into engagements without her parents' consent, and of
which they never can approve."

Both gentlemen answered at once. "My kinsman is incapable----" said the
Lord Marquis.

"I am confident that my daughter Lucy is still more incapable----" said
the Lord Keeper.

Lady Ashton at once interrupted and replied to them both: "My Lord
Marquis, your kinsman, if Mr. Ravenswood has the honour to be so, has
made the attempt privately to secure the affections of this young and
inexperienced girl. Sir William Ashton, your daughter has been simple
enough to give more encouragement than she ought to have done to so very
improper a suitor."

"And I think, madam," said the Lord Keeper, losing his accustomed temper
and patience, "that if you had nothing better to tell us, you had better
have kept this family secret to yourself also."

"You will pardon me, Sir William," said the lady, calmly; "the noble
Marquis has a right to know the cause of the treatment I have found it
necessary to use to a gentleman whom he calls his blood-relation."

"It is a cause," muttered the Lord Keeper, "which has emerged since the
effect has taken place; for, if it exists at all, I am sure she knew
nothing of it when her letter to Ravenswood was written."

"It is the first time that I have heard of this," said the Marquis;
"but, since your ladyship has tabled a subject so delicate, permit me
to say, that my kinsman's birth and connexions entitled him to a patient
hearing, and at least a civil refusal, even in case of his being so
ambitious as to raise his eyes to the daughter of Sir William Ashton."

"You will recollect, my lord, of what blood Miss Lucy Ashton is come by
the mother's side," said the lady.

"I do remember your descent--from a younger branch of the house of
Angus," said the Marquis; "and your ladyship--forgive me, lady--ought
not to forget that the Ravenswoods have thrice intermarried with the
main stem. Come, madam, I know how matters stand--old and long-fostered
prejudices are difficult to get over, I make every allowance for them; I
ought not, and I would not, otherwise have suffered my kinsman to depart
alone, expelled, in a manner, from this house, but I had hopes of being
a mediator. I am still unwilling to leave you in anger, and shall not
set forward till after noon, as I rejoin the Master of Ravenswood upon
the road a few miles from hence. Let us talk over this matter more
coolly."

"It is what I anxiously desire, my lord," said Sir William Ashton,
eagerly. "Lady Ashton, we will not permit my Lord of A---- to leave us
in displeasure. We must compel him to tarry dinner at the castle."

"The castle," said the lady, "and all that it contains, are at the
command of the Marquis, so long as he chooses to honour it with his
residence; but touching the farther discussion of this disagreeable
topic----"

"Pardon me, good madam," said the Marquis; "but I cannot allow you to
express any hasty resolution on a subject so important. I see that more
company is arriving; and, since I have the good fortune to renew my
former acquaintance with Lady Ashton, I hope she will give me leave to
avoid perilling what I prize so highly upon any disagreeable subject of
discussion--at least till we have talked over more pleasant topics."

The lady smiled, courtesied, and gave her hand to the Marquis, by whom,
with all the formal gallantry of the time, which did not permit the
guest to tuck the lady of the house under the arm, as a rustic does his
sweetheart at a wake, she was ushered to the eating-room.

Here they were joined by Bucklaw, Craigengelt, and other neighbours,
whom the Lord Keeper had previously invited to meet the Marquis of
A----. An apology, founded upon a slight indisposition, was alleged
as an excuse for the absence of Miss Ashton, whose seat appeared
unoccupied. The entertainment was splendid to profusion, and was
protracted till a late hour.
