Project Gutenberg's Tamburlaine the Great, Part I., by Christopher Marlowe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Tamburlaine the Great, Part I.

Author: Christopher Marlowe

Posting Date: August 5, 2008 [EBook #1094]
Release Date: November, 1997

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TAMBURLAINE THE GREAT, PART I. ***




Produced by Gary R. Young





TAMBURLAINE THE GREAT,

IN TWO PARTS.

This is Part I.

By Christopher Marlowe

Edited By The Rev. Alexander Dyce.


TRANSCRIBER'S COMMENTS ON THE PREPARATION OF THE E-TEXT:


SQUARE BRACKETS:

The square brackets, i.e. [ ] are copied from the printed book,
without change, except that the stage directions usually do not
have closing brackets.  These have been added.


FOOTNOTES:

For this E-Text version of the book, the footnotes have been
consolidated at the end of the play.

Numbering of the footnotes has been changed, and each footnote
is given a unique identity in the form [XXX].


CHANGES TO THE TEXT:

Character names were expanded.  For Example, TAMBURLAINE was
TAMB., ZENOCRATE was ZENO., etc.


GREEK:
One word, appearing in note 115, was printed in Greek Characters.
This word has been transliterated as <<deiktikos>>.



  Tamburlaine the Great.  Who, from a Scythian Shephearde
  by his rare and woonderfull Conquests, became a most
  puissant and mightye Monarque.  And (for his tyranny,
  and terrour in Warre) was tearmed, The Scourge of God.
  Deuided into two Tragicall Discourses, as they were
  sundrie times shewed vpon Stages in the Citie of London.
  By the right honorable the Lord Admyrall, his seruauntes.
  Now first, and newlie published.  London.  Printed by
  Richard Ihones:  at the signe of the Rose and Crowne
  neere Holborne Bridge.  1590.  4to.

The above title-page is pasted into a copy of the FIRST PART OF
TAMBURLAINE in the Library at Bridge-water House; which copy,
excepting that title-page and the Address to the Readers, is the
impression of 1605.  I once supposed that the title-pages which
bear the dates 1605 and 1606 (see below) had been added to the
4tos of the TWO PARTS of the play originally printed in 1590;
but I am now convinced that both PARTS were really reprinted,
THE FIRST PART in 1605, and THE SECOND PART in 1606, and that
nothing remains of the earlier 4tos, except the title-page and
the Address to the Readers, which are preserved in the Bridge-
water collection.

In the Bodleian Library, Oxford, is an 8vo edition of both PARTS
OF TAMBURLAINE, dated 1590:  the title-page of THE FIRST PART
agrees verbatim with that given above; the half-title-page of
THE SECOND PART is as follows;

  The Second Part of The bloody Conquests of mighty
  Tamburlaine.  With his impassionate fury, for the death
  of his Lady and loue faire Zenocrate; his fourme of
  exhortacion and discipline to his three sons, and the
  maner of his own death.

In the Garrick Collection, British Museum, is an 8vo edition of
both PARTS dated 1592:  the title-page of THE FIRST PART runs
thus;

  Tamburlaine the Great.  Who, from a Scythian Shepheard,
  by his rare and wonderfull Conquestes, became a most
  puissant and mightie Mornarch [sic]:  And (for his
  tyrannie, and terrour in warre) was tearmed, The Scourge
  of God.  The first part of the two Tragicall discourses,
  as they were sundrie times most stately shewed vpon
  Stages in the Citie of London.  By the right honorable
  the Lord Admirall, his seruauntes.  Now newly published.
  Printed by Richard Iones, dwelling at the signe of the
  Rose and Crowne neere Holborne Bridge.

The half-title-page of THE SECOND PART agrees exactly with that
already given.  Perhaps the 8vo at Oxford and that in the British
Museum (for I have not had an opportunity of comparing them) are
the same impression, differing only in the title-pages.

Langbaine (ACCOUNT OF ENGL. DRAM. POETS, p. 344) mentions an 8vo
dated 1593.

The title-pages of the latest impressions of THE TWO PARTS are
as follows;

  Tamburlaine the Greate.  Who, from the state of a
  Shepheard in Scythia, by his rare and wonderfull
  Conquests, became a most puissant and mighty Monarque.
  London Printed for Edward White, and are to be solde
  at the little North doore of Saint Paules-Church, at
  the signe of the Gunne, 1605.  4to.

  Tamburlaine the Greate.  With his impassionate furie,
  for the death of his Lady and Loue fair Zenocrate:  his
  forme of exhortation and discipline to his three Sonnes,
  and the manner of his owne death.  The second part.
  London Printed by E. A. for Ed. White, and are to be
  solde at his Shop neere the little North doore of Saint
  Paules Church at the Signe of the Gun.  1606.  4to.

The text of the present edition is given from the 8vo of 1592,
collated with the 4tos of 1605-6.




TO THE GENTLEMEN-READERS [1] AND OTHERS THAT TAKE PLEASURE
IN READING HISTORIES. [2]

Gentlemen and courteous readers whosoever:  I have here published
in print, for your sakes, the two tragical discourses of the
Scythian shepherd Tamburlaine, that became so great a conqueror
and so mighty a monarch.  My hope is, that they will be now no
less acceptable unto you to read after your serious affairs and
studies than they have been lately delightful for many of you to
see when the same were shewed in London upon stages.  I have
purposely omitted and left out some fond [3] and frivolous
gestures,
digressing, and, in my poor opinion, far unmeet for the matter,
which I thought might seem more tedious unto the wise than any
way else to be regarded, though haply they have been of some
vain-conceited fondlings greatly gaped at, what time they were
shewed upon the stage in their graced deformities:  nevertheless
now to be mixtured in print with such matter of worth, it would
prove a great disgrace to so honourable and stately a history.
Great folly were it in me to commend unto your wisdoms either the
eloquence of the author that writ them or the worthiness of the
matter itself.  I therefore leave unto your learned censures [4]
both the one and the other, and myself the poor printer of them
unto your most courteous and favourable protection; which if you
vouchsafe to accept, you shall evermore bind me to employ what
travail and service I can to the advancing and pleasuring of your
excellent degree.
     Yours, most humble at commandment,
          R[ichard] J[ones], printer.



THE FIRST PART OF TAMBURLAINE THE GREAT.




THE PROLOGUE.

      From jigging veins of rhyming mother-wits,
      And such conceits as clownage keeps in pay,
      We'll lead you to the stately tent of war,
      Where you shall hear the Scythian Tamburlaine
      Threatening the world with high astounding terms,
      And scourging kingdoms with his conquering sword.
      View but his picture in this tragic glass,
      And then applaud his fortunes as you please.
